# The Art of New Class Geography of the City: Culture-Guided Urban Regeneration Serving the Modernization of the Periphery 

### Ana Vilenica

*This text was written within the framework of the project ‘Creative
Work and Urban Regenerations’, financed by the Secretariat for Science
and Technological Development of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina,
as part of a campaign entitled ‘The Right to a First Chance’. One
version of this text was published in a collection of papers of the
Institute for Researching Art in Novi Sad: Vilenica, Ana, ‘Umetnost
regeneracije grada – Predu(z)metništvo kao biznis model novih
geopolitičkih konstelacija \[The Art of City Regeneration:
Artepreneurship as a Business Model of New Geopolitical
Constellations\]’.*

The capitalization of cultural resources has become a central issue of
post-industrial urban rule, and in capitalist societies art and culture
has become an important instrument in the processes of creating new
spatial and geopolitical constellations. Creative armies of designers
and artists are employed as a resource for cosmetic renovations of
cities, production of simulacra of authenticity and symbolic capital in
the process of creating a new class geography of the city. In the
context of Serbia, such a structural connection between culture, art and
capital is practiced within the framework of the project of
*cultivating* the capitalist periphery through the practices of
culture-guided urban regenerations wherein the art establishment,
cultural and creative industries and social-entrepreneurial art take
part. In the local context, culture-guided urban regenerations are most
often presented uncritically, as an always positive contribution of the
processes of city *development*, the shaping of its *identity*, its
*modernization* and *progress*, both in public narratives and in the
academic discourse. Such a discursive practice acts as an accomplice to
the attempts at smoothly carrying out aggressive processes of
transformation in cities that merely continue to produce the unendurable
state of enormous social disparities, the degradation of workers' and
social rights and the environment, as well as the all-round
discrimination of all those who do not belong to the desirable higher
classes, ethnicity, race or sexual orientation. Understanding this state
of affairs, as well as the role of culture and art, in a situation of
constant production of manipulative images and false promises, turns out
to be an important perspective towards articulating possible future
forms of struggle and creation of ‘new territories’.[^1]

## Urban Regenerations and the Role of Art and Culture

In capitalist societies, the connection between art and urban
regenerations is established as a model of producing a new class
geography of the city.[^2] Such connections have been made possible
through the interpenetration of art and the entire social and cultural
production mechanism under the conditions of the cultural colonization
of life effected by capitalist production.[^3] Under these
circumstances, art has become a resource and one of the important places
when it comes to constructing power. The historical genesis of the
connection between art and the transformation of cities is linked to the
context of the USA and the 1970's, when art created the preconditions
for the increase of real estate prices in reindustrialized cities[^4]
and thus for a new class recomposition of the city. In the districts
where artists came to live, art studios and art galleries proliferated,
and their symbolic capital increased the level of the rent, so that
poorer inhabitants of such districts tended to move out, and were
eventually followed by the artists themselves, who were replaced by
richer city dwellers. Today, the processes of class recomposition of
cities have been generalized at the global level, and their mechanisms
include manipulating *collective symbolic capital* as a new apparatus of
capitalist accumulation.[^5]

In the local context, the establishment of connections between art and
urban regenerations became possible with the forcible transformation of
socialist Yugoslavia after the 1990s and the establishment of new
capitalist relations. This change was accompanied by the wartime
destruction of cities – urbicide, the transformation of ownership
structure from social to private ownership, the switch from
self-management relations to capitalist-exploitative relations, the
development of corruption mechanisms and the absence of regulations when
it came to the acquisition of capital, deindustrialization, the
pauperization of the population, as well as the destruction of the
existing mechanisms for work in the domain of culture and art, and the
implementation of a new art/entrepreneurial model. In the era of
socialism, the development of cities was based on central urban
planning, and the state was the chief investor and planner of the new
modern socialist city, aimed at fulfilling the needs of the new
socialist man. Today, the new initiators of *urban development* are
private and corporate investors, acting in cooperation with the state,
city administration, global financial institutions, civil society
organizations, and also with artists and workers in the sphere of
culture.[^6] This kind of *investor planning* is characterized by a
continual search for a profitable terrain where a surplus of value can
be achieved, which is controlled by particular elites. In such a
situation, urban regenerations no longer represent merely an act of
repairing the neglected parts of the city, but most often constitute a
radical act of pulling down the existing buildings and building new
ones. Such processes are no longer a part of systematic thinking about
cities. The idea and role of a general urban planning design almost
matter not at all, for an investor who purchases a cheap plot of land,
having previously deliberately lowered the building costs, will not have
any great difficulties when it comes to changing the regulated function
of that particular area. In this way, the city stops being a space where
one strives to establish at least a nominal equality of its inhabitants,
and becomes a space of drastic social and economic inequalities and
tensions. The development of cities is promoted through new optimistic
visions promising benefits for all. This urban optimism simultaneously
hides the process of the creation of new class topography of the city,
and a revengeful attitude towards those inhabitants who are not among
the privileged ones.[^7]

Art and culture become an instrument and accomplices in such processes
through the inclusion of creativity as applied imagination in the
processes of producing optimistic urban visions. That is what
metanarratives about creative industries, creative cities and creative
economy are all about.[^8] In these narratives, culture and art are
reduced to their economic function in the project of attracting
investors, tourism and stimulating the economy through a reduction of
labor costs and social contributions, giving a boost to the
entrepreneurial model of work, privatization of culture and maximizing
profit. On the one hand, it is an urban mantra, and on the other, it
constitutes a social-economic and cultural policy. What is at work here
is a complex mechanism that absorbs all the aspects of life in
exercising control and exploitation in cities. In the local context and
in other so-called transitional societies, the introduction of the
cultural industry and the implementation of ideas about creative economy
and creative city are viewed as an act of modernizing a *backward*
society. The insufficient presence of such practices is explained by the
incompatibility of the administrative, legal, banking and business
systems in post-socialist countries with those of ‘advanced
economies’.[^9] In countries of South-Eastern Europe, this
*modernization model* is implemented through state policies, the
policies of cultural institutions and missions such as the British
Council or the Goethe Institute, and also as a business strategy of
private investors. Thus big cities in Serbia are regenerated through
European and local *policies* about creative cities, such as the
*Belgradisation of Belgrade* project and Belgrade's bid for a European
Capital of Culture in 2020,[^10] as well as the latest EU cultural
project entitled *Creative Europe*. Also, regeneration is carried out by
organizing cultural, entertainment or sports events such as the
*Universiade* or the *Eurovision Song Contest*, and through individual
projects promoting cultural industries and art as a generator of urban
regeneration processes[^11] and a guarantor of social inclusion in their
implementation. Such practices are aimed at creating an image of the
city as an innovative, exciting, creative and safe place for living,
playing and consumption, promising benefits for all, whereas what is, in
fact, being planned is a city of walled fortresses wherein the elite and
its way of life are to be reproduced.

In the local context, since the 1990's culture and art have become an
instrument of *progressive* *EU* *policies* aimed at creating an
environment conducive to effecting a transition to neoliberal capitalism
by way of carrying out the so-called *democratization of culture*, the
proclaimed goal of which was to free art and culture from the patronage
of the state and the Party, as a system which, allegedly, *a priori*
jeopardizes the basic human rights and the potential for creative
expression of individuals. What was produced in this process was a new
entrepreneurial subject of the artist, one no longer protected through
public financing but struggling for him/herself on the market.[^12] In
this way, art was used as a convenient tool for *cultivating* people on
the capitalist periphery. This neo-colonial process has not been
finished yet. Today, it is reproduced in the sphere of the
implementation of cultural industries and social-entrepreneurial art
used in the project of a *new modernization* of local society, which is
viewed as backward, and is particularly in evidence in the cases of
instrumentalization of art in the processes of urban regenerations. A
new profile of the artist that is promoted in this way is the
entrepreneurial artist – artepreneur[^13] who resolves problems in a
non-linear and creative manner. He/she is a precarious worker who
manages his/her human capital through self-employment from one project
to another. The figure of artepreneur assumes a particularly important
role in times of crisis, when it emerges, on the one hand, as a victim
of the macroeconomic situation, and on the other, as a force that brings
salvation.[^14] In contemporary art, the very idea of emancipation and
activism has become an issue related to entrepreneurship, and thereby,
being placed in the service of capital, normalized to a great extent.

## Art-guided Urban Regenerations in Belgrade

In Serbia, culture- and art-guided urban regenerations have been
promoted over the course of the past decade, and the realization of such
ideas has only intensified in the last few years. We find examples of
practices of culture- and art-guided urban regenerations in Serbia in
big cities, mostly in Belgrade, where the political, economic and
cultural life of Serbia is centralized. The epicenter of such activities
is in the area of Belgrade's riverbanks, which is currently the most
exclusive and profitable location in Belgrade. There has been interest
in the areas on the banks of the Sava and Danube rivers for a number of
years, and various projects prepared for that part of the city have
reflected the political, economic and cultural climate in the newly
established state. In early 1990, the Serbian Academy of Sciences and
Arts called an internal tender, within the framework of which the
project ‘Water City’ emerged, and in 1996 the Socialist Party of Serbia
commissioned the project *Europolis*.[^15] These projects have never
been realized, but that part of the city has never stopped attracting
the attention of new investors and the political parties in power, most
often during the course of pre-election campaigns.

The interest shown in Belgrade's riverbanks is not accidental and does
not concern only the attractiveness of the actual location. It also has
to do with the systematic work aimed at creating a new identity for
Serbia and Belgrade, in a place which, during the pre-socialist period,
in the first half of the 19<sup>th</sup> century, was projected to become the
economic centre of the city.[^16] It was there that the history of
capitalist Serbia was made, aiming to establish a continuity through a
systematic erasure of the socialist history and the industrial
development of this area. What is worrying about this is the fact that
this old Belgrade was a city of enormous class differences, where more
than 80% of the population lived in extreme poverty.[^17] The riverbanks
are also a place of memory engineering, connected with the recent
history of the wars fought in the 1990's on the territory of the former
Yugoslavia, which represents a continuation of the processes of
historical revisionism in Serbia, without which a projection of Belgrade
as a new European-Serbian urban centre for the higher classes is not
possible. One of the first great state projects of the regeneration of
that area was the renovation of Sava Square[^18], which began by the
expulsion of female sexual workers from the area, whose place was taken
over by a new revisionist monument to all war victims and defenders of
the homeland in the 1990-1999 period, thus equating victims and
executioners, and continuing the tradition of forgetting the fact that
the role of Serbia in those wars was that of an aggressor.

Today, that profitable area has become a battlefield where two
megaprojects vie for power: the project launched by the privately owned
company the Port of Belgrade entitled *Water City*, and the project
initiated by the Government of Serbia entitled *Belgrade on Water*.
*Water City* is an elite settlement occupying an area of 96 hectares of
land, whereas *Belgrade on Water* occupies a considerably larger area of
around 950 hectares of land, for which, apart from housing, the building
of business parks and a new port for yachts are also planned.[^19] By
planning the processes of urban regenerations and involving art and
cultural industries in the local strategic plans, the new creators of
optimistic visions wish to make Belgrade a part of the world market of
cities and make up for the decline of economic activities in the city.
The main social trump card of these projects is their promise to resolve
the problem of unemployment by creating new jobs in the sphere of
construction work during the realization phase, in the service sector of
the new walled communities, and also in the sector of cultural
industries, whereas what is happening in practice is a flexibilization
and deregulation of the procedures for investors and undertakers,
coupled with a degradation of workers' rights, which means an
increasingly frantic exploitation of all those engaged on the projects.
Experienced engineers of urban transformations, such as renowned world
architects, as well as mayors of cities wherein such processes have been
practiced, have already been involved in the initiation of urban
regeneration processes through the projects *Water City* and *Belgrade
on Water*. Thus the main designer of the *Water City* project is the
studio of Daniel Libeskind, whose biography includes numerous projects
through which similar processes have been initiated in other cities, and
the main consultant of the *Belgrade on Water* project is the well-known
New York mayor Rudolph Giuliani, whose brutal class and racist cleansing
of New York in the 1990's is well known.[^20] The initial phases of both
projects involve the use of art and cultural industries, which play the
key role in the preparatory phase of changing the function of the area
in question. They are a part of the marketing strategy for promoting its
transformation, as well as a *guarantor of* *the social awareness* of
new spatial transformations. These involve the projects *Soho in
Belgrade*, *Mixer* and *Urban Incubator*.

The project ‘Soho in Belgrade’ was initiated by the Port of Belgrade
company in 2012, as part of preparations for the realization of *Water
City*. The project presupposed enabling artists with well-established
reputations to use studios, free of charge, in one of the warehouses
inside the port, located in Dunavska Street, which formerly belonged to
the *Srbijateks* company. The aim of this joint initiative of tycoons
and the art establishment was the creation of the so-called *Soho
effect*. Over the past several years, this term has become a synonym for
urban regenerations in a number of instances involving the relocation of
art studios and artists' flats to derelict part of cities in the hope of
producing additional symbolic capital and thus initiating the
accumulation of capital. In the case of the project *Soho in Belgrade*,
the bringing of artists to the warehouse had another function in
addition to the aforementioned one, namely, participation in the process
of changing the purpose of the space where the port operator is
located.[^21] What this is all about are the efforts of the *Worldfin*
company to close down the port through a drastic reduction of its scope
of business operations, and to effect a symbolic and legal change of its
function, so as to be able to build a new luxury settlement on that plot
of land. From the very start, the new owner wanted to hide the fact
that, according to the general urban plan, that plot of land was
designated to have an economic function, and that its privatization
involved a port operator only. Through corruptive arrangements between
political parties and tycoons, a change of the general urban plan was
brought about, so that the function of that part of the city was changed
from an economic one to a housing-commercial one. Further room for
maneuvering was provided by the problem that arose over entering the
city in the registry book as the owner of the said plot of land. To put
it more precisely, the new owners made use of the fact that the city
failed to observe the deadline and submitted incomplete documentation,
and proclaimed that plot of land to be theirs. Apart from the change of
the general urban plan, manipulation over entering the owner in the
registry book and the reduction of the operative capacity of the port
operator, art was also involved in the process of changing the function
of that plot of land through the project *Soho in Belgrade*.

That artists are activists operating in the service of local tycoons is
evidenced by the situation that arose after the Ministry of
Infrastructure and Energy, acting upon a request submitted by the
Anti-Corruption Council, passed a decision on evicting artists from the
Port of Belgrade on account of irregularities in the procedure of
allocating studios to artists. Artists from Soho mobilized themselves in
defense of the owner of the Port, whom they presented to the public as a
new patron of the arts who, as opposed to the state, provided artists
with a *roof above their heads.*[^22] It is a fact that the working
conditions of artists, after the degradation of the socialist-era
mechanisms that enabled artists to obtain a studio, had become almost
unendurable. However, the artists in question here are not a part of the
class of artists who do need help. These are successful
artists-entrepreneurs, who are favorably positioned on the world art
market, most of whom do have their own working space, whereas some of
them do not live in Belgrade. These *Sohoite* artists constitute the
embodiment of everything that the new art establishment represents
today. These are positions that are defended through a return to
aestheticism and individual expression as the main criterion of art.
Within the framework of this kind of positioning, opportunism and
commercialism become desirable characteristics and a generator of
success. What is at work here is a reactionary artistic practice that is
articulated in opposition to the domain of critical and contextual
practices, with which it enters into an open conflict through its
insistence on being separated from sociability as the measure of true
art. In Belgrade's Soho, studios were allocated to select elite artists,
without anything in the nature of a public competition, which resulted
in the exclusion of those artists who are engaged in non-market-oriented
artistic practices, who are dependent on public financing and who do
need a working space. This resulted in an unbridgeable gap on the art
scene, which became visible to the public when the *Sohoites* organized
a panel discussion at the Kolarac People's University, in the course of
which public interest was defended by a group of artists presenting
themselves as *The World Communal Heritage*. [^23]

To the present day, the artists in the service of tycoons have not been
evicted from the studios in the *Srbijateks* warehouse, for the
commission that is supposed to carry out their eviction has never
inspected the site, which, once again, serves to hide the corruptive
mechanisms in the state. The epilogue of the story about the Port of
Belgrade commenced in August 2013, through the initiation of the
bankruptcy procedure. Parallel with this, the Government of Serbia,
through the representatives of the ruling Serbian Progressive Party,
embarked on a new campaign of promoting the project *Belgrade on
Water*.[^24] It is important to point out that a part of the project
*Belgrade on Water* is being planned on the plot of land held by the
operator of the Port of Belgrade, which sheds more light on why the
bankruptcy procedure is being initiated right now, despite the efforts
of the Anti-Corruption Agency of many years to point out the
irregularities surrounding the privatization and operation of that
company. In this case, it would appear that the more powerful
bureaucrats have used the tycoons to close down the port operations in
order to take over a part of the land already prepared for this purpose.

Even though the project *Belgrade on Water* was presented to the public
only midway through 2013, systematic preparations for its implementation
have been carried out for several years, by engaging art and cultural
industries in the district which, by means of the fabrication of
tradition, has become known again under the name of Savamala. The model
of regeneration being implemented in Savamala today is based on an
attempt to introduce a creative economy through creative industries,
within the framework of a project of increasing the symbolic capital of
the place and resolving the problem of economic deficit through
*creativization* and artistic-communal-participatory-social
entrepreneurship with a view to normalizing the situation of social
dissatisfaction, as well as a new legitimization of the history of the
place. These processes were not initiated by the city authorities but by
*independent* cultural initiatives, in cooperation with business groups
and with the German cultural mission – the Goethe Institute. Still, the
city and municipal authorities support the initiatives undertaken
through budget financing, allowing the use of space owned by the city,
and through affirmation by means of projects of establishing creative
economies and producing a creative city such as *Belgrade 2020*, which
accompanies Belgrade's bid for a European Capital of Culture.

The introduction and affirmation of cultural industries and stimulation
of the development of entrepreneurial creative economy as a form of
social activism and struggle for the revitalization of Savamala is a
task set by the project *Mixer*, which includes the eponymous festival
and the newly opened venue *Mixer House*.[^25] Even though *Mixer*
proposes a model of partnership with the business sector, as a practice
of the *de-etatization* of the creative sector and its *liberation*, in
a parallel development public budget funds are invested in the project
through a number of public companies and funds, which clearly shows a
switch in the domain of public financing – from support given to
critical practices to support given to commercial initiatives. The idea
of *Mixer* is to turn Belgrade into a Balkan creative centre and
incubator for young creative talents by developing the concept of the
creative city with a nucleus in the industrial zone that is losing its
function. What is at work here are efforts aimed at the accumulation of
symbolic capital in Savamala through the promotion of established
creators and entertainers, and through a frantic exploitation of all
those who are not privileged. The ethics of entrepreneurial
inventiveness is used to hide the issue of the precarious work
conditions of those who do not belong to the top echelon, their enforced
volunteer work and the imposition of hierarchical models, and often the
investment of the personal funds of young artists during the realization
of works that are featured in the programs of ‘Mixer’. On the other
hand, ‘Mixer’ is also a form of incubator for producing an army of
creative workers who are supposed to set the creative industry in
motion, as a sphere that is broader than cultural industries, in the
domain of a new urbanization of Belgrade. *Mixer* is deeply involved in
the processes of the so-called ‘creative destruction [^26] through
initiating new mechanisms for the accumulation of capital in the course
of paving the way for the arrival of investors and the building of
*Water City*. It is one of those entrepreneurial tactics that glorifies
the successes of individuals and neglects the failures of the majority,
and instead of new social networks, it offers alienated consumerism.
What is created in this way is a false promise of creating new
*authentic* relations, paving the way for capitalist uniformity at all
levels.

Parallel with *Mixer*, the processes of urban regenerations in Savamala
are also initiated using a somewhat different method, through the
practices of communal-participative-social art, as a subgroup of the
creative sector, which are realized within the framework of the Goethe
Institute project *Urban Incubator*.[^27] *Urban Incubator* was
presented as a participative model of urban development, whose aim is to
improve the quality of life of the local population and to *democratize*
the process of decision-making by means of a higher degree of
involvement of the inhabitants of the district. The project is a
short-term one, will last one year, and during that time it should
accumulate symbolic capital and increase the market value of the
district, following which the artists will withdraw, leaving room for
the coming of investors and the development of tourism. *Urban
Incubator* represents an attempt at implementing the *Western model* of
culture-guided urban regeneration in the local context (of the eleven
projects that were accepted in the competition, only two were initiated
by local artists and architects), and has been recognized as such by the
local city authorities and the municipality of Savski venac – as having
potential for the *development* of Savamala.

Realizing projects within the framework of *Urban Incubator*, the
artists engaged assume the competencies of urban planners, social
workers, ethnographers and researchers, and pass themselves off as
experts when it comes to reinventing the space of Savamala through
interventions in public space, collecting personal stories from the
community, participative design, *crowdsourcing*, designing small
businesses and micro factories with a view to enlivening the area and
engaging people from the local community in order to establish a
continuity with the entrepreneurial history of the place. Such an
artistic practice represents a specific architecture of the community
that includes economic exchange, civic life, public property and the
establishment of various new connections. What is evident about this
project is that it privileges participative art as a tool for cosmetic
interventions aimed at resolving the systemic problems of Savamala, or
even resorting to enforced participation or imposing parameters of art
projects onto the inhabitants of Savamala with the intention of
‘beautifying their living space and increasing the market value of their
flats’.[^28] This coupling points to the ideological subtext of
participative-social-entrepreneurial artistic practices, which can be
defined as a *culturalization of politics* or a dislocation of discourse
on complex and provocative social and political topics into the sphere
of culture and art.[^29] ‘Urban Incubator’ is a symptom of social
architects' *paranoid fear* of social unrest, and they engage art as a
*dependable means* of pacifying the accumulated dissatisfaction of the
inhabitants of Savamala, offering them a promise of a better life, all
the while, in fact, paving the way for the arrival of real estate
traders and opening more and more nightclubs and cafés.

## Conclusion

The transformation of the existing socialist structures and mechanisms
of cultural and artistic production, as well as the abandonment of
certain projects of sociability, the diminishing and increasingly
non-transparent public financing and the devastation of cultural
institutions, as well as giving in to the operation of the market
forces, have created conditions that are unendurable for the vast
majority of artists and workers in the sphere of culture. Seemingly
paradoxically, the public and investors give their support to the art
establishment and initiatives that promote *apolitical* entrepreneurial
artistic-designer practices. The creation of such conditions has
produced a fertile soil for manipulation and instrumentalization of art
by the state and its powerful bureaucrats, tycoons and their firms and
corporations, the cultural missions of national European states and the
broader EU policies, as well as local cultural entrepreneurs who believe
that they are on their way to becoming capitalists.

As has been shown in the local context and in countries of the
periphery, what is at work here is practicing certain creative-economic
models of regeneration of cities in the name of the *modernization* and
*democratization* of local society and its economy, within the framework
of which are intertwined *national and neo-colonial modernization*,
which act as accomplices in the process of producing the spaces of
capitalist periphery. What this is about is the implementation of new
neoliberal regimes of producing cities and creating conditions for
producing a new class geography in spaces where there are still
populations of different social and economic status living together,
and, naturally enough, the production of new mechanisms of
flexibilization of work and legislation in a project wherein the local
environment continues to be produced as a resource for *the developed
world*, and which is kept under control by means of carefully measured
loans which create a condition of *debt slavery*. Through the use of
art, culture and the cultural industry, *Western models* of urban
regenerations are implemented, the intention being to produce a quick
effect of changing the function of the given space, increasing its
symbolic capital, producing a new *identity* of the city, introducing
new forms of capitalist economy, as well as normalizing potential social
conflicts.

Still, despite their above-mentioned instrumental function in the
processes of reshaping cities, art, creativity and culture can also
represent significant factors of the destabilization of such *smooth*
processes of capital-guided urban transformation, and can participate in
producing a city based on different and more egalitarian relations,
outside the proven exploitative relations of power and division of
labor. For them to be established as such, it is necessary, to begin
with, to articulate a radical class critique of the (newly established)
capitalist relations in formerly socialist cities in Serbia, as well as
a critique of the use of art and culture, and also to be engaged in
continual theoretical-activistic-political work on producing different
relations, which are anxiously articulated today through certain local
practices in a state of *insobriety* produced by the social
transformation and the new rules of the game wherein (artistic and
cultural) activism becomes an instrument of capital.

### Reference List

Barok, Dušan. *On Participatory Art: Interview with Clear Bishop*.
Prague: Transit Initiative, 29 July 2009,
*http://www.academia.edu/771895/On\_participatory\_art\_Interview\_with\_Claire\_Bishop* (http://www.academia.edu/771895/On_participatory_art_Interview_with_Claire_Bishop).

Berman, Marshall (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marshall_Berman). *All
That Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of
Modernity* (http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=mox1ywiyhtgC), Ringwood:
Viking Penguin. 1988.

Beograd 2020.
*http://www.beograd2020.com/* (http://www.beograd2020.com/).

'Beograd na vodi: projekat vredan osam milijardi evra! \[Belgrade on
Water: A Project Worth Eight Billion Euros!\]', *Večernje novosti*, 14
October 2013,
*http://www.kurir-info.rs/beograd-na-vodi-projekat-vredan-osam-milijardi-evra-clanak-1034045* (http://www.kurir-info.rs/beograd-na-vodi-projekat-vredan-osam-milijardi-evra-clanak-1034045).

'Beograd na vodi ili političari u kampanji \[Belgrade on Water or
Politicians Campaigning\]', *Politika*, 11 August 2013,
*http://www.politika.rs/rubrike/Beograd/Beograd-na-vodi-ili-politicari-u-kampanji.lt.html* (http://www.politika.rs/rubrike/Beograd/Beograd-na-vodi-ili-politicari-u-kampanji.lt.html).

Berry Slater, J. and Iles, A. *No Room to Move: Radical Art and
Regenerate City*, London: Mute, 2010.

C5, School of Urban Practices.
*http://projectc5.blogspot.it/*(http://projectc5.blogspot.it/).

*Creative Europe.*
*http://ec.europa.eu/culture/creative-europe/*(http://ec.europa.eu/culture/creative-europe/).

Dave Beech, 'Include Me Out!'. *ViS*, 1 September 2010,
*http://visualintosocial.wordpress.com/category/talks/dave-beech-on-participation/*(http://visualintosocial.wordpress.com/category/talks/dave-beech-on-participation/).

Castells, Manuel. *The Urban Question*, London: Edward Arnold, 1977.

Deutsche, Rosalyn and Cara Gandel Rian. 'The fine art of
gentrification', *October* 31 (Winter, 1984): 91–111.

Foster, Hal. *The Return of the Real*, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1996.

Florida, Richard. *Cities and the Creative Class*, London: Routledge,
2005.

Florida, Richard. *The Rise of the Creative Class and how it's
Transforming Work, Leisure and Everyday Life*, London: Basic Books,
2002.

Glass, Ruth. *London: Aspects of Change*, London: Centre for Urban
Studies, 1964.

Grad na vodi: Luka Beograd \[Water City: the Port of Belgrade\],
*http://www.lukabeograd.com/GradNaVodi/Masterplan.html*(http://www.lukabeograd.com/GradNaVodi/Masterplan.html).

Grlja, Dušan. 'Antinomies of Post-Socialist Autonomy'. *Red Thread*
(2009),
*http://www.red-thread.org/en/article.asp?a=16* (http://www.red-thread.org/en/article.asp?a=16).

Harvey, David. *The Urbanization of Capital.* Oxford: Basil Blackwell,
1985.

Harvey, David. *The Condition of Postmodernity*. Cambridge MA and Oxford
UK: Blackwell, 1992.

Harvey David. *Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban
Revolution*, London: Verso, 2012.

'Incident na otkrivanju spomenika na Savskom trgu \[Incident During the
Unveiling of the Monument in Sava Square\]', *Kurir*, 24 March 2012.

Jameson, Fredric*. Postmodernizam u kasnom kapitalizmu* \[*Postmodernism
in Late Capitalism*\], Belgrade: KIZ Art Press, 1995.

Jones, Campbell and Murtola, Anna-Maria. 'Entrepreneurship, Crisis,
Critique, in Hjorth, Daniel (ed.) *Handbook on Organisational
Entrepreneurship*, Edward Elgar: Northampton, 2012.

Jovanović, Miloš. *Constructing the National Capital,* master diss., CEU
Budapest, 2008.

Knežević, Vida, Miletić, Marko. 'Beograd 2020: Grad čuda, nova kulturna
politika u Srbiji i prostori borbe \[*Belgrade 2020: A City of Wonder,
the New Cultural Policy in Serbia and the Spaces of Struggle*\]', in Ana
Vilenica and kuda.org *Na ruševinama kreativnog grada* \[*On the Ruins
of the Creative City*\], Novi Sad: kuda.org, 2012.

Libby Porter and Kate Shaw (eds). *Whose Urban Renaissance,* London:
Routledge, 2009.

Luka Beograd. Grad na vodi \[The Port of Belgrade – Water City\],
http://www.lukabeograd.com/GradNaVodi/Masterplan.html.

Mikser \[Mixer\]. *http://blog.mikser.rs/o-mikseru. 04th August
2013*(http://blog.mikser.rs/o-mikseru.%2004.%20avgust%202013).

Monthoux, Pierre Guillet de. 'Organising Reality Machines: Artepreneurs
and the new Aesthetic Enlightenment', in Daniel Hjorth (ed.), *Handbook
on Organisational Entrepreneurship*, Northampton: Edward Elgar, 2012.

Pasquinelli, Matteo. 'Kreativna sabotaža u fabrici kulture: umetnost,
džentrifikacija i metropola \[Creative Sabotage in the Culture Factory:
Art, Gentrification and the Metropolis\]', in Ana Vilenica and kuda.org.
*Na ruševinama kreativnog grada*, Novi Sad: kuda.org, 2012.

Peck, Jamie. 'The Creativity Fix' in *Eurozine*, 28 June 2007,
http://www.eurozine.com/articles/2007-06-28-peck-en.html.

'Pokrenut stečaj Luke Beograd \[The Bankruptcy Procedure Initiated for
the Port of Belgrade\]', *Vreme*, 6 August 2013,
*http://www.vreme.rs/cms/view.php?id=1130342* (http://www.vreme.rs/cms/view.php?id=1130342)

'Počela beogradizacija Beograda \[The Belgradisation of Belgrade
Begins\]', *Blic*, 2 August 2010,
*http://www.blic.rs/Vesti/Beograd/201025/Pocela-Beogradizacija-Beograda* (http://www.blic.rs/Vesti/Beograd/201025/Pocela-Beogradizacija-Beograda).

Rikalović, Gojko. *Kreativna Srbija: Novi pravci razvoja* \[*Creative
Serbia: New Directions of Development*\]. Belgrade: Anonymous said,
2011.

'Rudolf Džulijani u poseti Beogradu i SNS \[Rudolph Giuliani Visits
Belgrade and the Serbian Progressive Party\]', *Politika*, 11 September
2012.

Soho u Beogradu \[Soho in Belgrade\],
*http://www2.lukabeograd.com/soho-bg.html*(http://www2.lukabeograd.com/soho-bg.html).

Smith, Neil. *Uneven Development: Nature, Capital, and the Production of
Space*, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990.

Smith, Neil. *New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist
City*. London: Routledge, 1996.

Švob-Đokić, Nada (ed.). *The Emerging Creative industries in
Southeastern Europe*, Zagreb: Institute for International Relations,
2005.

Tomić-Koludrović, Inga and Petrić, Mirko 'Creative Industries in
Transition: Towards a Creative Economy?', in Švob-Đokić, Nada (ed.),
*The Emerging Creative industries in Southeastern Europe*, Zagreb:
Institute for International Relations, 2005.

UN CER. United Nations Creative Economy Report (UN CER), United Nations,
2008,
*http://unctad.org/en/Docs/ditc20082cer\_en.pdf* (http://unctad.org/en/Docs/ditc20082cer_en.pdf).

Urban Incubator Belgrade,
*http://www.goethe.de/ins/cs/bel/prj/uic/enindex.htm* (http://www.goethe.de/ins/cs/bel/prj/uic/enindex.htm).

'Uskoro novo lice Savskog trga \[Soon, a New Look of Sava Square\]',
*Blic*, 28 November 2011.

Vilenica, Ana. *Teorije i prakse aktivizma u umetnosti u drugoj polovini
XX veka* \[*Theories and Practices of Activism in Art in the Second Half
of the 20<sup>th</sup> Century*\], PhD thesis, The University of the Arts,
University of Belgrade, 2012.

Vilenica, Ana and kuda.org. 'Preuzmimo grad! Kako? \[Let's Take Over the
City! How?\]', in Vilenica, Ana, kuda.org, *Na ruševinama kreativnog
grada*, Novi Sad: kuda.org, 2012.

Vilenica, Ana. 'Soho u Beogradu: Umetnička elita u službi tajkuna \[Soho
in Belgrade: The Art Elite in the Service of Tycoons\]', in nsparentnost
*2012*, 14 September 2011,
http://82.149.22.226/~mobcinamb/index.php?ptype=8&menu=0&id=220&Pid=617.

Vuksanović-Macura, Zlata. *Život na ivici: Stanovanje sirotinje u
Beogradu 1919-1941* \[*Living on the Edge: The Housing of the Poor in
Belgrade 1919-1941*\], Belgrade: Orion Art, 2012.

World Bank. *Entrepreneurship Snapshots 2010: Measuring the Impact of
the Financial Crisis on New Business Registration*, 2011.

Yudice, George. *The Expediency of Culture: Uses of Culture in the
Global Era*, Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2003.

Zibechi, Raúl. *Territories in Resistance: A Cartography of Latin
American Social Movements*, Edinburgh: AK Press, 2012.

Zukin, Sheron. *Cultures of the Cities*, Cambridge MA and Oxford UK:
Blackwell, 1995.

'Šeik ‘doneo’ BG na vodi, kredite… \[The Sheikh ‘Brings’ Belgrade on
Water, Loans\]', *B92*, 12 December 2013,
http://www.b92.net/biz/vesti/srbija.php?yyyy=2013&mm=12&dd=12&nav\_id=788601 (http://www.b92.net/biz/vesti/srbija.php?yyyy=2013&mm=12&dd=12&nav_id=788601).

[^1]: Raúl Zibechi, *Territories in Resistance: A Cartography of Latin
    American Social Movements*, Edinburgh: AK Press, 2012.

[^2]: David Harvey, *Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the
    Urban Revolution*, London: Verso, 2012; Josephine Berry Slater and
    Anthony Iles, *No Room to Move: Radical Art and Regenerate City*,
    London: Mute, 2010; Matteo Pasquinelli, 'Kreativna sabotaža u
    fabrici kulture: umetnost, džentrifikacija i metropola \[Creative
    Sabotage in the Culture Factory: Art, Gentrification and the
    Metropolis\]', in Ana Vilenica and kuda.org. *Na ruševinama
    kreativnog grada*, Novi Sad: kuda.org, 2012.

[^3]: Fredric Jameson, *Postmodernizam u kasnom kapitalizmu*
    \[*Postmodernism in Late Capitalism*\], Belgrade: KIZ Art Press,
    1995; Ana Vilenica, *Teorije i prakse aktivizma u umetnosti u drugoj
    polovini XX veka* \[*Theories and Practices of Activism in Art in
    the Second Half of the 20<sup>th</sup> Century*\], PhD thesis, The University
    of the Arts, University of Belgrade, 2012.

[^4]: Rosalyn Deutsche and Gandel Cara Rian, 'The Fine Art of
    Gentrification', *October* 31 (Winter, 1984): 91-111.

[^5]: David Harvey, *Rebel Cities*.

[^6]: Ana Vilenica and kuda.org, 'Preuzmimo grad! Kako? \[Let's Take
    Over the City! How?\]', in Vilenica, Ana, kuda.org, *Na ruševinama
    kreativnog grada*, Novi Sad: kuda.org, 2012.

[^7]: Neil Smith, *New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist
    City*, London: Routledge, 1996.

[^8]: Richard Florida, *Cities and the Creative Class*, London:
    Routledge, 2005; UN CER. United Nations Creative Economy Report (UN
    CER), United Nations, 2008,
    http://unctad.org/en/Docs/ditc20082cer\_en.pdf;
    Nada Švob-Đokić (ed.) *The Emerging Creative industries in
    Southeastern Europe*, Zagreb: Institute for International Relations,
    2005.

[^9]: Inga Tomić-Koludrović, Mirko Petrić, 'Creative Industries in
    Transition: Towards a Creative Economy?', in Nada Švob-Đokić (ed.),
    *The Emerging Creative industries in Southeastern Europe*.

[^10]: Vida Knežević, Marko Miletić, 'Beograd 2020: Grad čuda, nova
    kulturna politika u Srbiji i prostori borbe \[Belgrade 2020: A City
    of Wonder, the New Cultural Policy in Serbia and the Spaces of
    Struggle\]' in Ana Vilenica, kuda.org, *Na ruševinama kreativnog
    grada* \[*On the Ruins of the Creative City*\], Novi Sad: kuda.org,
    2012.

[^11]: Vilenica and kuda.org, 'Preuzmimo grad! Kako? \[Let's Take Over
    the City! How?\]'.

[^12]: Dušan Grlja, 'Antinomies of Post-Socialist Autonomy', *Red
    Thread*, 2009,
    http://www.red-thread.org/en/article.asp?a=16.

[^13]: Pierre Guillet de Monthoux, 'Organising Reality Machines:
    Artepreneurs and the New Aesthetic Enlightenment', in Daniel Hjorth
    (ed.), *Handbook on Organisational Entrepreneurship*, Northampton:
    Edward Elgar, 2012.

[^14]: Campbell Jones and Anna-Maria Murtola, 'Entrepreneurship, Crisis,
    Critique', in Daniel Hjorth (ed.), *Handbook on Organisational
    Entrepreneurship*.

[^15]: 'Beograd na vodi ili političari u kampanji \[Belgrade on Water or
    Politicians Campaigning\]', *Politika*, 11 August 2013,
    http://www.politika.rs/rubrike/Beograd/Beograd-na-vodi-ili-politicari-u-kampanji.lt.html.

[^16]: Miloš Jovanović, *Constructing the National Capital*, master
    diss., CEU, Budapest, 2008.

[^17]: Zlata Vuksanović-Macura, *Život na ivici: Stanovanje sirotinje u
    Beogradu 1919-1941* \[*Living on the Edge: The Housing of the Poor
    in Belgrade 1919-1941*\], Belgrade: Orion Art, 2012.

[^18]: 'Uskoro novo lice Savskog trga \[Soon, a New Look of Sava
    Square\]', *Blic*, 28 November 2011,

[^19]: Večernje novosti, 14 October 2013, Politika, 11 August 2013,
    ‘Water City’: the Port of Belgrade, 2010.

[^20]: Smith, 1996, Politika, 11 September 2012.

[^21]: Ana Vilenica, 'Soho u Beogradu: Umetnička elita u službi tajkuna
    \[Soho in Belgrade: The Art Elite in the Service of Tycoons\]', in
    *Maribor 2012*, 14 September 2011,
    http://82.149.22.226/\~mobcinamb/index.php?ptype=8&menu=0&id=220&Pid=617.

[^22]: Vilenica, 'Soho u Beogradu’.

[^23]: Vilenica, 'Soho u Beogradu’.

[^24]: 'Pokrenut stečaj Luke Beograd \[The Bankruptcy Procedure
    Initiated for the Port of Belgrade\]', *Vreme*, 6 August 2013,
    http://www.vreme.rs/cms/view.php?id=1130342.

[^25]: Mikser \[Mixer\], 4 August 2013,
    http://blog.mikser.rs/o-mikseru.

[^26]: Marshall Berman, *All That Is Solid Melts into Air: The
    Experience of Modernity*, Ringwood: Viking Penguin. 1988; David
    Harvey, *The Condition of Postmodernity*. Cambridge MA and Oxford
    UK: Blackwell, 1992.

[^27]: Urban Incubator Belgrade,
    http://www.goethe.de/ins/cs/bel/prj/uic/enindex.htm.

[^28]: C5, School of Urban Practices,
    http://projectc5.blogspot.it/ (http://www.academia.edu/771895/On_participatory_art_Interview_with_Claire_Bishop).

[^29]: George Yudice, *The Expediency of Culture: Uses of Culture in the
    Global Era*, Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2003.
