---
Pr-id: Publications   
P-id: Theory on Demand  
A-id: 17  
Type (formerly called Item): book  
Book-type: anthology  
Anthology item: article  
Item-id:   
Article-title: The Gray Zones of Creativity and Capital  
Article-status: accepted  
Author: Šefik Tatlić, Gordana Nikolić
Author-email:    
Author-bio:     
Editor: Šefik Tatlić, Gordana Nikolić
Abstract:     
Keywords: capitalism, publication, creativity, capital, art, contemporary, text, culture, ideological, post
  
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)

---




# The Gray Zones of Creativity and Capital: Introduction#
### Šefik Tatlić and Gordana Nikolić###

The initial idea that led to the preparation of this publication was not
a reflection of the editors’ wish to merely add another publication
focusing on a critique of the relationship between creative industries
and capital to the huge corpus of similar publications taking a critical
stance towards the process of co-optation of creativity, creative
industries, art or the domain of abstraction in general by capital. Even
though, precisely through the logic of the mass production of critical
texts dealing with the above-mentioned context, this publication as well
will ultimately exist in such a register, the distinctive feature of
this publication is its aspiration to place the relationship between
creativity and capital in the context of an analysis wherein capitalism
is treated as the framework of a broader relationship of domination,
which to a great degree goes beyond the currently popular critical niche
focused on analyzing the relationship between creativity, abstraction or
representation in general and capital.

The vast majority of such publications are characterized by such a
perception of the relationship between creativity and capital, which
implies that the co-optation and exploitation of work, creativity and
attention occurs in a post-class, post-ideological or post-colonial
context of the so-called ‘networked world or networked democracy’,
wherein all subjects and their actions are reportedly subjected to the
logic of capital in the same way. Regardless of whether we speak of the
ideological use of the concept of creativity in the name of
rationalization of the neoliberal strategies of transforming the city
into ghettoized class and racial apartheids, whether we speak of the
exploitation of attention (the economy of attention) by financial
capital or generally about the epistemological positioning of
creativity, abstraction or the domain of representation within the
dominant form of rationalization and reproduction of capitalism, this
publication strives to retain a critical view that sees these processes
as forms of the perpetuation of the hegemony of capitalism in the
so-called contemporary era.

As regards the temporal framework encompassed in this publication,
although certain texts, through the logic of the necessity of
historicization of specific strategies and practices refer to historical
periods preceding the 21<sup>st</sup> century, the majority of the texts contained
in this publication refer to social and political processes from the end
of the 20<sup>th</sup> and the beginning of the 21<sup>st</sup> century, that is, the current
period. In this sense, the dominant ideological discourses, strategies
and power relations of today constitute the focus of attention of the
topics of this publication.

This publication, then, occupies a position that treats ‘the networked
world’, its democracies, cognitivities, attention and culture as domains
wherein, or with help of which, forms of the reproduction of capitalism
as a heterogeneous form of hegemony, primarily of the First World of
capital or the West, are reorganized, ‘modernized’. The title ‘The Gray
Zones of Creativity and Capital’ does not, therefore, point primarily to
instances of vagueness and dichotomy in the analysis of the social
meaning of the cooperation between creativity and capital, but assumes a
critical stance towards ‘gray areas’ in those dominant interpretations
of capitalism that try to view it as a post-ideological, post-class or
post-bloc system.

Before shortly introducing the texts it should be noted that this
publication in its iteration in Serbian language contained one article
that is not featured in this English iteration. The text had to be left
out because of copyright contraints that don’t allow this text to be
featured in an online publication. The text in question was written by
Santiago Castro-Gómez and it is entitled ‘The Missing Chapter of Empire
– Postmodern reorganization of coloniality and post-Fordist capitalism’
(*Cultural Studies Volume 21*, Issue 2-3, 2007).[^1] This text, by
critically refering to the book *Empire* by Antonio Negri and Michael
Hardt, criticized the view of capitalism as a system of equal
exploitation of all. Castro-Gómez saw the capitalism of today as a
modernized form of the colonial division of the world, in which the
First World of capital, the West, still retains a monopoly on defining
progress, and in which that same world retains a surplus of privileges
within the framework of the unbalanced distribution of global wealth.
This text’s role was to position this publication in decolonial register
which is still the register in which this publication continues to
reside.

The text by Jonathan Beller entitled ‘Within the Image’ analyses in a
similar manner, but from a different perspective, the socio-political
meaning and the ideological effects of the capitalist exploitation of
the image and attention. From a structuralist position, Beller analyses
the role which the commodification of the image, attention and
abstraction plays in the neoliberal free market and its ideologies, but
in those same contemporary forms of capitalism the author also detects a
specific colonial and racial relationship of domination.

Josephine Berry Slater’s text ‘Neutralizing Engaged Subjects in the
Creative City’, relying on Foucault’s theoretical apparatus, criticizes
the biopolitical and repressive character of the neoliberal strategies
of transforming urban Great Britain in the post-Thatcher era. Even
though Slater locates the roots of the neoliberal strategies of social
engineering and the *laissez-faire* concept of organizing society and
the economy in Thatcher’s attack on the role of society in the
regulation of society, the author links the roots of the derogation of
subversive social engagement with the contemporary forms of organization
of capitalism, in an alliance with the modern art mainstream.

Marc James Léger’s text ‘The Agency of Art in the Unconscious’
critically addresses contemporary art as a form of reproducing the
nullity of social significance contained in the domain of creativity in
capitalism. Relying to a large extent on the psychoanalytic theories of
Lacan and Žižek, Leger structurally links contemporary art and the
domain of creativity in general to modern political economy a way that sees contemporary art as a form of neutralization of radical
fiction that antagonizes the above-mentioned relationship with
capitalist economy.

‘The Art of New Class Geography of the City – Culture-guided urban
regeneration serving the modernization of the periphery’ is a text by
Ana Vilenica wherein she critically addresses the practices and
principles contained in the neoliberal establishment of a class
geography of urban environments in Serbia. Vilenica’s text does not
remain at the level of analyzing the neoliberal strategies of
contemporary capitalism, but also deals with the broader meaning of
class and racial principles invested in the processes of modernization
in general. In this sense, Vilenica analyzes the effects of an alliance
of sorts between capital and creative industries, emphasizing the role
of art and culture in contemporary capitalist ideological rhetorics.

Sandi Abram’s text ‘The Creative Factory: Collective Creativity and
Autonomy in the Neoliberal Machine of Creative Industries’ analyzes the
effects of post-Fordist cognitive capitalism on the social scene in
Ljubljana, Slovenia. Abram assumes a critical stance towards the
public-private partnership model invested in the processes of producing
a new class geography of urban environments, which is a model that Abram
sees as a part of a broader pan-European paradigm of gentrification.
Analyzing the transformation of the Rog factory in Ljubljana, Abram sees
the processes of gentrification as parts of a broader capitalist
strategy of turning the entire society into a factory and/or a specific
commodified niche in the hierarchies of capitalist exploitation.

The text by Irmgard Emmelheinz, entitled ‘Neoliberalism and the Autonomy
of Art: The Culture of Power, the Power of Culture’ analyses the effects
of reconfiguring the social-political role of the figure of ‘the Other’ in
the context of Mexico and/or the broader region of Latin America.
Emmelheinz takes a critical position in relation to postmodern
democratic culture and the institutions of contemporary art than she
sees to be a part of the broader process of the utilization of culture
by capitalism. The author concludes that within the space of division of
political and aesthetic representation occurs a paradigmatic change in
the role of culture in neoliberal capitalism, whose autonomy no longer
points to its ability to produce a radical criticism of the system, but
precisely the opposite –to its total depoliticization.

First of all, the function of all these texts within the context of this
publication is to expand the critique of capitalism to include a
critique of all the normative practices contained in capitalism as a
hegemonic power structure, primarily of the First World of capital, and
then also of all the other actors involved in maintaining the
hierarchies of exploitation.

Since the region of the former Yugoslavia is still undergoing the
obscene process of the so-called transition to a free market economy,
dictated by the colonial centre in the West and carried out by a
politically impotent ethnocentric nation state, the role of this
publication is to contribute to the interpretation of these processes as
processes of a devastating derogation of the political role of the
state, the concept of political control of society and devastation of
society in general as a collective which transcends, that is, which
should transcend the centrality of ethnicity. This publication, then,
establishes a structural connection between the reportedly separated
concepts of modernization and the establishment of capitalist
hierarchies of exploitation.

In this sense, all those processes –such as the depoliticization of
culture, subjecting culture and art to the logic of the free market,
that is, separating the state from culture– which are presented in the
public discourse by the ruling elites and free market proponents as
strategies and ideological principles necessary for a transformation of
society, politics and the economy into functional modern societies –are
viewed in this publication as strategies and ideological principles
serving to establish capitalist modernity only. This publication, then,
positions itself radically against the imposition and legitimization of
such an ideological supernarrative wherein only the hierarchies of
exploitation, radical class and ethnic divisions and the impotence of
politics reduced to an administrative professional category will be
functional to the detriment of society which has yet to be politicized
and/or reinvented as a collective whose needs surpass the needs of the
free market and the specific actors who profit the most from its logics.

[^1]: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/09502380601162639\
