---
Pr-id: Publications   
P-id: Theory on Demand  
A-id: 17  
Type (formerly called Item): book  
Book-type: anthology  
Anthology item: article  
Item-id:   
Article-title: The Gray Zones of Creativity and Capital  
Article-status: accepted  
Author: Irmgard Emmelheinz
Author-email:    
Author-bio:     
Editor: Šefik Tatlić, Gordana Nikolić
Abstract:     
Keywords: art, political, social, culture, autonomy, public, work, autonomous, cultural
  
  
  
  
Rights: Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0)



---


# Neoliberalism and the Autonomy of Art: The Culture of Power, the Power of Culture[^1]

### Irmgard Emmelheinz

In Mexico, advanced neoliberal reforms are taking place at a much faster
pace than in other parts of the world. These reforms have not only
delivered new forms of life and making a living, but also created new
sensibilities. The erosion of the social contract brought on by these
reforms, has had tangible, negative effects on the social tissue. This
has materialized, for example, in what is known as the most violent and
dangerous city in the world, Ciudad Juárez, where in 2010 alone 3000
people were killed. Bearing this in mind, I define neoliberalism as a
*sensibility* that shapes subjectivities, permeates art and culture,
differentiates and homogenizes people, molds lives and desires, mistakes
information for knowledge, gives shape to space and thus to social
relations, normalizes violence, creates ways of seeing the world that
justify destruction and dispossession with notions progress and
development, or that tries to solve economic precarity through self-help
and permanent education. I argue that neoliberalism is more than a
system that is ruled by a free market economy, which implies the
privatization of the welfare state and an array of government services
(for example: education, health, energy), subcontracting to the private
sector and changes in labor laws and worker’s rights as well as a
transnational division of labor. The system of control under
neoliberalism combines a militarized police regime with repressive
tolerance, the logic of securitization with granting freedom of
expression and ‘quality of life’. The political figures, molded and
governed by the neoliberal regime itself are: the *homo oeconomicus*
(the entrepreneur responsible for his own well-being and manager of his
own human capital) and the subject of rights (the State is in charge of
guaranteeing that his human rights are respected). Aside from an
economic-political system, I see neoliberalism as a way of relating to
the world, to nature, to things and beings, which presupposes unlimited
growth and development. It is also a way of living and working: human
beings are put to work beyond their capacities, erasing the distinction
between leisure and work time. Neoliberalism is also a sensibility that
establishes the terms of empathy and sympathy and has outlined a new
notion of alterity. Configured as ‘social responsibility’ or social
work, to ‘help’ the Other means to focus on the (so-called) ‘secondary
malfunctions’ of the current capitalist system by disseminating personal
and managerial practices such as tolerance, showing respect, nurturing
dialogue, transparency and social collaboration. In this sense, the ‘Other’ is a ‘community to come’, the ‘subject of rights’ (to ethical
restitution: refugees, displaced, immigrants, those who live under a
‘state of exception’), the *underclass*, that is, he or she who will be
permanently outside globalizing processes, including access to
education, jobs and consumption. The category of the ‘Other’ encompasses
political and religious fundamentalists as well: fanatics who are
outside globalizing and modernizing processes by choice. These *Others*
are sometimes given faces in the media or in art by spectacularizing
their subjectivity but obviating the processes that render their lives
precarious and endangered in the first place.

What has this got to do with the autonomy of art? As we will see,
postmodernism put art and culture at the center of social, political and
economic processes. They are now inextricable from work, production,
consumption and subjectivity: in the neoliberal regime, art in
particular and culture in general are used actively as compensation and
improvement of tools, all the while normalizing and spreading the
antithesis of autonomous art, that is, ‘useful art’. Subsumed to
political action, much of contemporary art has taken up a political role
as either ‘sensible politics’ or ‘socially engaged artwork’. This is
tied to the fact that in our current world order, as Marina Vishmidt and
Kerstin Stakemeier point out, ‘art no longer designates a reproductive
and representational realm, but one of productivity and social power’
and thus the autonomy of art itself has become a problem – in so far as
it has become a realm for the production of added value.[^2]

In the September 2013 editorial of *e-flux journal*, editors Juliete
Aranda, Brian Kuan Wood and Anton Vidokle stated that art is produced at
a double bind: while art can be complicit in or instrumentalized by
power, its autonomy is located in an imaginary space. What do they mean
by this? First, that art, in order to be *seen*, depends on a platform –
an institution – and thus needs to be part of some art world. Second,
that the autonomy of art – as a separate regime or an isolated sphere –
is a fantasy. In order to consider the autonomy of art outside of this
double bind, Clement Greenberg tied the autonomy of art – as art’s for
art’s sake – to the avant-garde situating criticality within the
discipline or medium of art itself. In Greenberg’s definition,
avant-garde (modernist) painting clearly takes a position against
socialist realist painting and those debates of the 1930s that rely on
the relationship between art and politics (embodied for example by
Mexican muralist painting, which was very popular in New York in the
1930s). He characterizes avant-garde by its self-critique in the sense
that its formal expression is a meditation on the qualities of the
medium of painting. This meant extricating figuration from the arts, and
an essentialist understanding of the mediums of art: for Greenberg,
‘purity’ was political – especially if it was seen as an embodiment of a
free nation versus the authoritarian Soviet Union.

Postmodernism could be understood as an effort to break with Greenberg’s
disciplinary totalitarianism. Taking up the Dadaist and surrealist
avant-garde’s goals of unifying art and life, postmodernism thrived on
the advent of interdisciplinary strategies and the symbiosis of art with
everything else. Post-war art continued the vanguardist critique of the
bourgeois notions of autonomous art and expressive artists. It embraced
everyday objects, transformed the artist’s function, questioned the
institution of art and attacked it in an anarchist manner.[^3] Following
Hal Foster, art from the 1950s and 1960s represents the failure to
destroy the institution of art and the institutionalization of the
avant-garde.[^4] If Greenberg advocated aesthetic autonomy with the
purpose of resisting the illustrational meanings typical of kitsch and
commercial forces, post-modernist’s interdisciplinary strategies led
art, in Foster’s words, ‘to become embedded into life under the terms of
mass capitalism, while it became appropriated by the culture
industry’.[^5] Due to its ‘post-medium’ condition, as Rosalind Krauss
termed ‘postmodern interdisciplinarity’, art is enmeshed with reality,
and its materials can range from and beyond social interaction to
scientific research and montage. With postmodernism, the politics of the
autonomy of art meant breaking away from in Greenberg’s sense of purity
and thus art’s autonomy came to be conceived as ‘provisional, always
defined diacritically (as something supplemental to art) and situated
politically, always *semi*’.[^6]

Beyond postmodernism, parallel to an increase of corporate subsidies to
the arts, there has been a recent boom in private collecting and thus a
market boom. The value of art is speculative and reflects the logic of
finance-based economy (and risk): the economy and critical art share the
core value of ‘innovation’. In this regard, neoliberalism has meant
privatization for the arts or the collusion between the private and the
public sector in order to subsidize them. In the past decade or so (and
in the US long before that), corporations have played an important role
in investing in culture. Institutions and corporations have been seeking
to play an important role in communicating the point of view of the
private sector on an array of critical public topics.[^7] If art was
previously supported by the state, because culture was considered to be
an asset to the nation, today, corporations have appropriated this
function, as they sponsor and jury art shows, grant awards and funds and
collect artworks. Meanwhile, they promote their perspectives on critical
public topics.[^8] In a 1998 article, art historian Chin-tao Wu
highlighted how corporations appropriate the concept of innovation –
also known as innovative disruption or creative destruction – in order
to redefine its meaning in corporate terms. She quotes John Murphy,
executive vice-president of Philip Morris Inc – a U.S. cigarette company
– on their sponsorship of the 1969 exhibition, *When Attitudes Become
Form*:

>We feel it is appropriate that we participate in bringing these works to the attention of the public, for there is a key element in this ‘new art’ which has its counterpart in the business world. That element is innovation – without which it would be impossible for progress to be made in any segment in society.[^9]

Furthermore, in the context of neoliberal reforms and sensibilities,
there is a global tendency to subdue contemporary art to the politics of
culture administration, which implies ‘democratizing culture’ making it
accessible to the masses, using it as a tool for the well-being of
society, and the reconstruction or healing of a community or society
that has experienced violence. Cultural institutions subsidized by
corporations and individual patrons apparently follow progressive
agendas promoting political or socially minded art. For instance,
*Creative Time* in New York (funded by a mix of state and corporate
support) supports public and community art, with the goal of enabling
the politicization of social space with cultural intervention. This
organization sponsored Tania Bruguera’s *Immigrant Movement
International*, a project developed in Queens, New York in 2011, which
the artist describes as: a flexible community space and long-term
socio-political movement, public workshops, events, actions and
partnerships with immigrant and service organizations. The artist
further qualified her project as ‘useful art’.[^10] The problem is that
initiatives such as this one, render opaque the real economic conditions
that led to situations of immigrant precarity to begin with; immigrants
are local signs of complex global forces operating on conditions of life
and work at home and abroad. Many would argue that to subsidize a
project like Bruguera’s signals the transfer of social work to artistic
work funded by the private sector. Politics comes into the scene through
art as social work in the name of ‘public interest’, only to become
subject to administration, engineering and a technocratic way of
administering social problems, configuring the private version of the
welfare state.[^11] Furthermore, as corporate support to the
establishment of antagonistic spaces becomes gradually institutionalized
within society, the question rises, after Gregory Sholette, ‘Who owns
cultural capital and who has the right to use it?’ For him, corporate
involvement in the arts is akin, or perhaps integral, to the current
erosion of public space.[^12] Moreover, as cultural spaces become
institutional bastions of democratic self-expression and sites for
social reconciliation and self-help, dissent is criminalized and
forcefully punished worldwide.

It becomes evident that art and culture are central to neoliberal
processes that act as agents of globalization and as tools for
improvement and development, counterinsurgency and pacification. An
extreme example of this could be the ‘culturally sensible’ occupation of
Iraq as described by Nato Thompson (director of *Creative Time*). In
uncritical terms, Thompson recounts how General David Petraeus wrote a
field manual geared at changing people’s attitudes towards the American
occupation of Mosul:

>\[It is\] a story about counterinsurgency and community organizing, about getting to know people as an occupying force, and getting to know people as neighbors. It is a story about the military entering the terrain of that thing called culture.[^13]

In this regard, a ‘cultural approach’ to military occupation is akin to
artistic social and community practices, as both involve ‘getting to
know people to be able to change the landscapes of life and of
power’.[^14] In the case of civilians in Mosul, this is done by
obviating their experiences of being under attack. This cultural turn in
the U.S. military machinery took place a few years after theorist
Frederic Jameson diagnosed a ‘cultural turn’ in capitalism, arguing that
social space had been completely saturated with the image of culture.
This is because in professional and daily activities, as well as in the
various forms of entertainment we enjoy, society consumes cultural
products all the time. The postmodern ‘cultural turn’ diagnosed by
Jameson, was further elaborated by George Yúdice upon observing (in
2003) that the uses of culture had undergone an unprecedented expansion
not just in the marketplace but also along social, political, and
economic lines. According to Yúdice, since the state and corporations
already utilize culture as a tool as they search for economic and
sociopolitical betterment, culture has become a resource and a
compensatory device to the ravages neoliberal policies have caused on
social tissue: both give meaning and symbolic representations, provide
mechanisms of solace, as well as function as tools for re-invention and
amelioration.[^15] In this context, the line between public programs and
relational aesthetics or participative art appears to be increasingly
blurred. Former Mexican president Felipe Calderón made a public
appearance in February 2012 in Ciudad Juárez in front of a sign that
read: ‘No More Weapons’. The billboard measured 8×21 meters, and was
built by soldiers of the National Defense Department with 3 tons of
assault weapons that were confiscated at the Mexican border and molten
into bricks. During the ceremony in which the billboard was unveiled,
Calderón turned toward the Mexican-American border and begged the U.S.
(in bad English): ‘No more weapons! Dear friends of the United States,
Mexico needs your help to stop this terrible violence we are suffering’.
During this trip, Calderón also participated in the destruction of 6
thousand confiscated weapons, and planted a tree at a Community Center.
Calderon’s propagandistic gestures immediately recall the language of
socially engaged contemporary art, particularly, Pedro Reyes’
intervention, *Palas por Pistolas* in Culiacán in 2008 (also executed in
Juárez in the same week of Calderon’s visit). Reyes’ project of
exchanging shovels for weapons was subsidized by two predominant Mexican
corporations: Trupper, which produces hardware, and Coppel, which sells
appliances and other goods. For this project, Reyes devised a Television
campaign inviting citizens to give up their weapons in exchange for a
coupon for appliances. The artist collected 1527 weapons, which were
destroyed at a military zone in a public act. Giving his action a
further twist, Reyes sought to have the rests of the weapons welded
together to produce 1527 shovels carrying an inscription telling the
story of the weapon they represented (this was not possible due to
technical reasons, so Trupper ended up donating them). The engraved
shovels were distributed in art institutions and public schools. Adults
and children planted 1527 trees. To Reyes, this ritual had a pedagogical
purpose: ‘to show the people how an agent of death can become an agent
of life’.[^16] A similar public purge of weapons in exchange for
appliances (and tablets), is currently happening in Mexico City led by a
‘Pink Ladies Brigade’. These relational actions – both by General
Petraeus’ and by the Mexican government – show how the language of
contemporary art has been appropriated by propaganda for its purposes,
making politics and aesthetics indistinguishable, as both operate in the
realm of symbolic and perceptive work. These are also examples of the
predominant idea that violence can be eased – or appeased – through
cultural intervention and in the Mexican case, by giving away highly
desirable goods.

Aside from this ‘artistic approach’ to social, political and military
action, sensible production has taken up a political function. Political
work has been developed into a matter of codification using medial forms
with the purpose of creating a terrain for political acts, creating an
‘activist imaginary’ made of political fields constituted by images.
Political action embedded in cultural forms implies making things public
as a way of signs.[^17] An example could be Trevor Paglen’s (sometimes
abstract or blurry) photographs of top-secret governmental, nuclear and
military sites. Works such as Paglen’s, seek to make visible the
invisible under the premise that such an act is political. Yet, what
images such as Paglen’s represent is vague in political terms. What I
find problematic is that the gap between *political* representation and
*aesthetic* representation is now wider than ever. Representation means
‘making the absent present’, which is always an incomplete task because
totality is impossible to convey, and it works in two senses. As
*Vertreten* (or political representation) it means taking the place of
others in order to speak on their behalf, and as *Darstellen* (or
aesthetic representation) it is the form of representation that implies
describing the other in the first person. Representation was brought
into a crisis in the 1960s because it was accused of hiding the fact
that the speaker was occupying the place of the represented and thus,
workers and minorities were prompted to speak on their own behalf and in
the first person. Nowadays, however, the gap between political
(*Vertreten*) and aesthetic (*Darstellen*) representations is wider than
ever. Whatever political acts encoded in medial forms may represent,
they render it unstable, partly because politics have become
unrepresentable due to a lack of stable political subjects; they are
collective enunciations constantly ‘becoming’. In this context,
‘expressive’ politics is valued over representation because ‘it embodies
rebellious subjectivities expressing themselves without delegation and
they do so through formal and symbolic richness’.[^18] One of the issues
that rises is that there is lack of a common ground to universalize the
multiplicity of singular struggles and social movements scattered across
the world like archipelagos. There are just too many images in the
infosphere, and ‘sensible politics’ exists for and by its own public,
which is made up of social movements and politically minded cultural
producers. In this regard, cultural infrastructure functions as the
platform for ‘sensible politics,’ in which curators, museum directors
and board members (sometimes representing corporate interests) select
and contextualize artwork that presents certain events and social
actions, thus determining the boundaries of public thinking.

Aside from its compensatory role, culture (when it is ‘creativity’ and
cognitive production), is not only at the center of political action,
but is also embedded in production and consumption processes, and in
neoliberalism, at least insofar as it has thrived in post-Fordist
(flexible) forms and conditions of labor. Neoliberalism has taken up the
characteristics of aesthetic production. Signs and nascent meanings,
desires and projections meet in the market because the post-Fordist
economy is based on manufacturing experiences, signs and information.
The core of the knowledge economy is creativity. This is why qualities
of aesthetic production have become hegemonic and have transformed labor
and consumption processes as well as aesthetic experiences. Not only
sensations and feelings are trivialized and packaged for sale,
disinterestedness (the core of aesthetic experience as defined by Kant)
has also vanished.[^19] This arises as the result of aesthetic
experience that is enslaved for profit, as well as subsumed to
‘political’ efficiency in the sense of State and corporate strategic
investment in culture and the transformation of political action into
sensible forms – as opposed to action. These tendencies are a result of
what Stephen Shaviro describes as ‘the ruthless cognition of aesthetic
sensations and feelings’, as they are transformed into data and
exploited forms of labor which are marketed as fresh experiences,
exciting lifestyle choices, or as socially-responsible cultural
activities. In the political arena, thirty years of neoliberalism have
crushed any confidence that we might have had in the social contract. If
artists used to identify with the proletariat and social struggles,
nowadays, aesthetic production – which is lacking a reflexive program in
regards to the conditions of its own production – is geared just toward
the supplementing of the entertainment market with cultivated and
knowledgeable new experiences and sensations. Furthermore, through
subsidizing art and cultural projects, corporations, states and arts
patrons put into practice the following principle of the Prince Claus
Fund: ‘There can be no development without culture, and there can be no
cultural development without freedom of debate’.[^20] As this quote
becomes evermore evident, the public expects from culture and art
rigorous accountability, critical questioning, democratic access,
dialogue, openness and equal representation in the visual regime. This
is posited as the road to development. In this context, culture is
perceived as ‘a basic need’, as the founding principle of Prince Claus
Fund states. Thus, states, corporations, the private sector and society
attribute to art a decisive political, as they invest in culture with
the purpose of generating political and economic surplus value. Bearing
in mind that the autonomy of art is always a political matter, could art
be politicized beyond its autonomy as a site for added value?

The condition of possibility of autonomous, committed art under the new
neoliberal world order, is radically different from what we see as the
autonomy of art under modernism (as *l’art pour l’art*) and post-modern
interdisciplinarity. These imply the institutionalization of the
avant-garde and the subsumption of art to the market, bearing in mind
that the emancipatory promises of modernism (criticality, self-design,
creativity) are now located at the center of our everyday lives both via
consumption and production processes. Theodor Adorno’s take on the
autonomy of art in his 1962 essay entitled *Commitment*, can be helpful
here. In this essay, Adorno responds to Jean-Paul Sartre’s aesthetic
manifesto *What is Literature?* and elaborates a theoretical debate
about engaged literature and autonomous art. According to Adorno there
are two kinds artworks. On the one hand, there are works that ‘are
vulgarly assimilated to the existence against which they protest’.[^21]
These works ‘are content with being mere fetishes or a pastime, and thus
degenerate and become de-politicized cultural merchandise’.[^22] This
de-politicization, for Adorno is in fact, deeply political. A lot of
politically or socially-minded contemporary art would fit into this
category. On the other hand, there is *engaged autonomous art* which is
necessarily detached from reality. Adorno defines the autonomy of art
not in the sense of its strictly formalist aspect, although like Walter
Benjamin, Adorno also vouches for works of art that are both formally
and politically progressive. For Adorno, autonomous art negates a direct
connection to reality. The distance that autonomous art has from
reality, however, is mediated by reality itself. This means that a work
of art cannot come out of the blue: its origin is a reaction against
reality. Adorno, as does Benjamin, draws a distinction between
‘commitment’ and ‘tendency’. Committed art does not bear the intention
of generating betterment measures, legislative acts, practical
institutions (like propaganda) or even transmitting a concrete ideology.
It operates at the level of fundamental attitudes. For Adorno,
autonomous and engaged works of art operate at the level of abandoning
the social contract with reality and ‘cease to speak as if they were
reporting the facts: this is the moment in which a work of art makes
people’s hair stand up’.[^23] According to Adorno, the shock of the
unintelligible (or the ambiguous), is able to communicate more than what
is legible and explicit. In that sense, works of art are autonomous,
instead of heteronomous. Heteronomy implies that an artwork is subject
to a different power, a law that is external and foreign to art and its
formal logic. When it is autonomous, engaged art is neither subject to
empirical reality nor a correct political tendency. Art’s autonomy
protects it from popularization and adoption by the market. Its autonomy
implies liberating it from any other external purpose: from being
useful. In this manner, an autonomous work of art does not convey a
message nor does it need to convince the public or preach to the
converted. And although it opposes society, autonomous art is still part
of it.

If the autonomy of modern art implied considering art as a realm
distanced from reality, art’s post-medium condition now means that it
has become a niche within reality.[^24] What is at stake in autonomous
art nowadays, would be to posit it as an experience of reality that is
fundamentally foreign and antagonistic to the prevailing reality. If the
autonomy of art should be located in the realm of reproduction, as
Marina Vischmidt argues,[^25] it would oppose the realm of production of
the social, political and economic surplus value. It would go against
embodying power and the entrepreneurial model of work. Producing
difference and dragging out the laboring conditions hidden within it,
autonomous art would imply mimesis with distancing itself. Beyond being
used as a tool, autonomous art would refuse becoming an instrument
against its own illusions, as well as refusing to become a political
force, to be subjected to interests foreign to itself or simply becoming
a pleasing commodity. Overcoming self-censorship, it would cease to
participate in the economy of the globalized art world, especially in
the name of critical practices, political work or social justice,
abandoning its claim to become a progressive social force.[^26] Above
all, it would work against the power of culture and the culture of
power.

### References

Adorno, Theodor. ‘Commitment’, *New Left Review* I (87088)
(September-December, 1974), http://newleftreview.org/I/87-88/theodor-adorno-commitment.

Emmelhainz, Irmgard. ‘Art and the Cultural Turn: Farewell to Committed
Autonomous Art?’, *e-flux journal* 42 (February, 2013), http://www.e-flux.com/journal/art-and-the-cultural-turn-farewell-to-committed-autonomous-art.

Espósito, Marcelo. ‘Lecciones de historia. El arte, entre la
experimentación institucional y las políticas del movimiento’, 2009.
SITAC lecture, http://marceloexposito.net/pdf/exposito_sitac.pdf.

Foster, Hal. ‘What’s Neo about the Neo-Avant-Garde?’, *October*, Vol. 70
(Autumn, 1994): 5-32.

Fraser, Andrea. ‘Le 1% c’est moi’, 2011,
http://whitney.org/file_columns/0002/9848/andreafraser_1_2012whitneybiennial.pdf.

Marchart, Oliver. ‘Art, Space and the Public Sphere(s)’, 2002,
http://eipcp.net/transversal/0102/marchart/en.

McLagan, Megan and McKee, Yates (eds). *Sensible Politics:* *The Visual
Culture of Nongovernmental Activism*. Cambridge, Mass.: Zone Books,
2012.

Shaviro, Stephen. ‘Accelerationist Aesthetics’, *e-flux journal* \#46
(Summer, 2013),
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/accelerationist-aesthetics-necessary-inefficiency-in-times-of-real-subsumption.

Sholette, Gregory. ‘Welcome to the Desert of the Real Artworld’, *Oxford
Art Journal* 27 (2) (2004) pp. 260-261.
http://www.gregorysholette.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/07_welcome1.pdf.

Stakemeier, Kerstin and Vishmidt, Marina. ‘The Value of Autonomy: A
Conversation Between Kerstin Stakemeier and Marina Vishmidt About the
Reproduction of Art’, *Texte zur Kunst* 88 (December, 2012): 102-117.

Thompson, Nato. 2013, ‘The Insurgents Part I: Community-Based Practice
as Military Methodology,’ *e-flux journal* \# 47 (September, 2013),
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-insurgents-part-i-community-based-practice-as-military-methodology.

Vishmidt, Marina. ‘Mimesis of the Hardened and Alienated: Social
Practice as a Business Model’, *e-flux journal* \# 46 (March, 2013),
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/“mimesis-of-the-hardened-and-alienated”-social-practice-as-business-model.

Wu, Chin-tao. ‘Embracing the Enterprise Culture: Art Institutions Since
the 1980s’, *New Left Review* I 230 (July-August, 1998).

[^1]: Different versions of this essay were presented at Bureau Publik,
    Copenhagen, 31 October 2013 and KHIB in Bergen, Norway, on 5
    November 2013.

[^2]: Kerstin Stakemeier and Marina Vishmidt, ‘The Value of Autonomy: A
    conversation between Kerstin Stakemeier and Marina Vishmidt about
    the reproduction of art,’ *Texte zur Kunst* 88 (December 2012):
    102-117.

[^3]: Hal Foster, ‘What’s Neo about the Neo-Avant-Garde?’ *October*,
    Vol. 70, The Duchamp Effect (Autumn 1994): 5-32.

[^4]: Foster, ‘What’s Neo about the Neo-Avant-Garde?’.

[^5]: Foster, ‘What’s Neo about the Neo-Avant-Garde?’.

[^6]: Foster, ‘What’s Neo about the Neo-Avant-Garde?’.

[^7]: Gregory Sholette, ‘Welcome to the Desert of the Real Artworld,’
    *Oxford Art Journal* 27.2, (2004), p. 259.
    http://www.gregorysholette.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/07\_welcome1.pdf.

[^8]: Sholette, ‘Welcome to the Desert of the Real Artworld,’ pp.
    260-261.

[^9]: Chin-Tao Wu, ‘Embracing the Enterprise Culture: Art Institutions
    Since the 1980s’, *New Left Review* I/230, (July-August 1998): 31.

[^10]: See artist’s statement available at:
    http://www.taniabruguera.com/cms/486-0-Immigrant+Movement+International.htm.

[^11]: Oliver Marchart, ‘Art, Space and the Public Sphere(s)’, 2002,
    http://eipcp.net/transversal/0102/marchart/en.

[^12]: Sholette, ‘Welcome to the Desert of the Real Artworld’.

[^13]: Nato Thompson, ‘The Insurgents Part I: Community-Based Practice
    as Military Methodology,’ *e-flux journal* \# 47, (September 2013),
    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-insurgents-part-i-community-based-practice-as-military-methodology.
    In the second part of his essay, Thompson includes a disclaimer
    about him glossing over U.S. military violence in Iraq. See:
    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-insurgents-part-ii-fighting-the-left-by-being-the-left.

[^14]: Thompson, ‘The Insurgents Part I’.

[^15]: See Irmgard Emmelhainz, ‘Art and the Cultural Turn: Farewell to
    Committed Autonomous Art?’, *e-flux journal* N. 42 (February 2013),
    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/art-and-the-cultural-turn-farewell-to-committed-autonomous-art.

[^16]: Artist’s statement available online:
    http://pedroreyes.net/palasporpistolas.php(http://newleftreview.org/I/87-88/theodor-adorno-commitment).

[^17]: See Megan McLagan and Yates McKee (eds), ‘Introduction’,
    *Sensible Politics: The Visual Culture of Nongovernmental Activism*,
    Cambridge, Mass.: Zone Books, 2012, pp. 9-22.

[^18]: Marcelo Espósito, ‘Lecciones de historia. El arte, entre la
    experimentación institucional y las políticas del movimiento’, SITAC
    2009.
    http://marceloexposito.net/pdf/exposito\_sitac.pdf (http://www.e-flux.com/journal/art-and-the-cultural-turn-farewell-to-committed-autonomous-art/).

[^19]: Stephen Shaviro, ‘Accelerationist Aesthetics,’ *e-flux journal*
    \#46 (Summer 2013).

[^20]: From their website: “… The Prince Claus Fund’s mission is to
    actively seek cultural collaborations founded on equality and trust,
    with partners of excellence, in spaces where resources and
    opportunities for cultural expression, creative production and
    research are limited and cultural heritage is threatened. The Prince
    Claus Fund is based in Amsterdam and is supported by the Dutch
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Dutch Postcode Lottery.” For
    more information, visit their website:
    http://www.princeclausfund.org/en/the-fund.

[^21]: Theodor Adorno, ‘Comittment’, *New Left Review* I/87088
    (September-December 1974),
    http://newleftreview.org/I/87-88/theodor-adorno-commitment (http://whitney.org/file_columns/0002/9848/andreafraser_1_2012whitneybiennial.pdf).

[^22]: Adorno, ‘Comittment’.

[^23]: Adorno, ‘Comittment’.

[^24]: Marina Vishmidt, ‘Mimesis of the Hardened and Alienated: Social
    Practice as a Business Model,’ *e-flux journal* 43 (March, 2013),
    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/“mimesis-of-the-hardened-and-alienated”-social-practice-as-business-model (http://eipcp.net/transversal/0102/marchart/en).

[^25]: Vishmidt, ‘Mimesis of the Hardened and Alienated’.

[^26]: Andrea Fraser, ‘Le 1% c’est moi’, 2011: ‘Le gorille penseur est
    un guerrier: le guerrier est un être pour la mort, puisque son
    métier consiste à mourir. Ici, il pense un peu à la fin de son
    espèce, ou à la fin de l’ère des — notre époque n’est plus
    celle des guerriers, elle est celle des insectes, des animaux
    insignifiants, plus capables de s’adapter…’
    http://whitney.org/file\_columns/0002/9848/andreafraser\_1\_2012whitneybiennial.pdf (http://www.e-flux.com/journal/accelerationist-aesthetics-necessary-inefficiency-in-times-of-real-subsumption/).
