# Within the Image
### Jonathan Beller

*Portions of this essay were originally published as ‘Wagers Within the
Image: Rise of Visuality, Transformation of Labour, Aesthetic Regimes’
in Culture Machine, vol. 12, 2012; http://www.culturemachine.net.*

Let us examine a few consequences of the industrialization of the
visual. As IPO after IPO seem to demonstrate, to look is to labor:
looking itself is posited as value-productive labor. We know this now.
In the cinematic mode of production this generalizes to what I called
‘the attention theory of value’.[^1] Today, after the internet
revolution (or, perhaps equally, counter-revolution), this relation
between screen-time and social production is increasingly pre-supposed.
Of course the energy levels, control modules and digitized metrics of
interactivity have been vertiginously intensified. Here we must remark
that with the digitization of the screen as socio-biological interface,
with the ramification of both its functionality and the intensive
development of a metrics of attention, the stock prices of media
companies such as Google are what they are because they are exploits:
schemas for the expropriation of value produced by the users (and
therefore the used). Early dot.com markets picked up on this shift
before it was widely understood. Today, this arrangement of
screen-cybernetics along with an increasingly precise metrics of
attention has its sights on nearly every aspect of lived and to-be-lived
time, even those forms of time that are engaged in organized struggle
against capitalist forms of domination. As has been remarked, the
perception of Facebook’s and Twitter’s future monetization potential
increases with every ‘Twitter revolution’: unrests in Tunisia, Cairo,
Madrid and New York become bankable events for new media corporations in
ways at once departing from but analogous to what news has long been for
print and television.

This interface between spectator and social machinery, realized as ‘the
image’ (which received rigorous critical analysis by the Frankfurt
School, the ‘situationists’ (Debord) and feminist film theory), has been
generalized to the omnipresent screen and is also being extended to the
other platforms and senses: ‘the computer,’ ‘the tablet,’ and ‘the
cellphone’ – all of which appear increasingly similar. Now, of course,
the programme is being extended to sound, smell, touch and taste – music
and game sounds, obviously, but also programmed shopping environments
(which themselves extend into the urban fabric) organized by
architecture, texture, scent, and arguably salt, sugar and fat. These
innovations and their convergence (towards the omnipresent, omnivorous
and indeed omniscient cyber-spatialized
mall-military-prison-post-industrial cosmopoplex) bring about new levels
of interactivity as well as new and ever more elaborate metrics for the
organization and parsing of attention-production.

Such a transformation of the role of visuality, sensuality and their
media technologies in social production and reproduction necessitated
the formulation of the above mentioned attention theory of value, which
reduces to the labor theory of value at sub-light (sub-cinematic) speeds
but allows value formations to persist for a while in the electronic
matrix in non-monetized forms. The theory posits that attention produces
value in at least three ways:

1.  Attention valorizes media bytes and pathways in ways that can be
    monetized – paintings, films, war propaganda, advertisements; and
    monetized on spec: Yahoo, Google, Facebook, Twitter, Groupon (these
    are all forms of expropriation through privatization of
    the commons). While there are various levels and/or strategies for
    the valorization of attentional labor (from ticket sales, to the
    sale of advertising, to the IPO), what needs to be remarked upon is
    the still intensifying capitalist ramification of the domain of the
    visual and, more generally, the sensual. This domain (remember the
    shared institution called privacy?), formerly part of the commons,
    is now pitted, furrowed and trolled by the avatars of private
    entities bent upon the capture of formerly extra-economic
    activities: from accessing water, to looking around, to thought. The
    extent of this transformation that amalgamates attention with
    privately owned mediation has completely reorganized the logistics
    of perception, along with the mental functions that have perception
    as their basis (which is to say all conscious, and arguably the
    majority of unconscious processes, including language-function) on a
    planetary scale.

2.  Thus we can say that the techno-economic shifts marked by cinema and
    its legacy technologies utilize attention to retool spectators,
    reworking on a minute-by-minute basis forms of social know-how, of
    needs, of semiotic and affective capacities, and demanding a
    constant revamping of ‘the soul’ (or of soullessness – as the case
    often seems to be). Workers, prosumers, playborers and those
    described by Flusser in a different context as ‘functionaries’
    (those who work within the programme of the camera) ready themselves
    and are thereby readied for the developing exigencies of the
    market.[^2]

3.  Over time visuo-attentional transformations as indexed by emerging
    media technologies reorganize (i.e., reprogramme) language-function
    along with the imaginary and performativity such that the daily
    retoolings can be dialectically incorporated into or functionalized
    by the daily advances in technical interfaces. Althusserian
    ‘know-how,’ the capacity to work for capital produced in schools and
    other ‘ideological state apparatuses’,[^3] receives ever more
    penetrating and subtle elaboration through the techno-capitalist
    capture of the ‘cognitive-linguistic.’ It thus participates in what
    Virno, giving new life to a term from Marx, effectively identifies
    as the subsumption of ‘the general intellect’.[^4] In a recent
    remark, Žižek has noted that what Bill Gates accomplished with
    proprietary software was the privatization of part of *the general
    intellect, which we now rent.*[^5] *The result is that privatized
    media are omnipresent in the praxis of consciousness, never more
    than a couple of interfaces away from any and all attentional
    practices, such that attention to any aspect of life becomes a form
    of production in the social factory of capitalism.*

Most of these relations discussed above could be, and indeed were,
derived, in one form or another, pre-internet: they were already
inherent in cinema and television, even though they have become fully
manifest only in the so-called digital age. However, given that capital
itself imposed a relentless digitization of life beginning in the
fifteenth century, it is more accurate to think of today’s ‘digital
revolution’ as Digitality 2.0. These relations of communication and
social cooperation were therefore incipient in the first digital
revolution, that of capital itself.

Thus, early in the twentieth century, one could already see that the
extension of media pathways was, in fact, the further ramification of
the life-world by capital-logic. The communist revolutionary filmmakers
marked capital’s encroachment on the visual as a site of struggle; Third
Cinema (the cinema of decolonization), in Solanas’ and Getino’s
manifesto, famously asserted that for the purposes of colonialism
Hollywood was more effective than napalm (2000). Today the habitation of
the senses by the logic of capitalized visuality is widespread,
structuring desire, performance, perception and self-perception on a
world scale, even in the most unlikely of places. For example, a recent
essay by Danny Hoffman entitled ‘Violent Virtuosity: Visual Labour in
West Africa’s Mano River War’ argues that the spectacular crimes against
others in the region are precisely that: spectacles of maiming and mass
murder designed to garner attention in a world-media system (which
includes broadcast news, the internet and the U.N.) that rewards Africa
for specific kinds of self-production.[^6] As Hoffman demonstrates
through a close analysis of photographic and videographic materials,
‘This was a war structured by the economy of attention. To profit in
this economy, combatants and non- combatants were required to play to an
audience that they knew was there, but often could only sense or
apprehend in the most abstract way’.[^7] Although this should be obvious
it bears emphasizing: just because there is no computer in the room does
not mean that one escapes its programme.

One sees two significant factors in this global distribution of the
logistics of the image-interface: first, that the struggle for attention
is a struggle for existence at many levels. And second, that restricting
ourselves to categories that are marked only as politico-economic ones
does not allow us to resolve the specific aspects of this struggle. Very
simply, race, gender, nationality and other ‘socio-historical’
categories must therefore be thought in their economic determinations
within (and in excess of) the attention economy.

## Within the Image / The System of Global Apartheid

The increasing power of visual and digital media gave rise to new forms
of cultural imperialism (which, in case there was ever any doubt, is
actually real imperialism by other or additional means). Martin Jay has
identified various ‘scopic regimes of modernity,’ Regis Debray analyses
the emergence of what he calls the ‘videosphere’ which overtakes the
‘logosphere’ in the 19<sup>th</sup> century and Nick Mirzoeff in The Right to Look
identifies complexes of visuality spanning the plantation (1660-1865),
imperialism (1857-1947), and military industrialism (1945-present,
Mirzoeff’s periodizations).[^8] We can clearly grasp from this
intensification of the visual (however periodized and parsed) that
capital targets not just territory but also consciousness, visual
relations and the imagination itself in its struggle to organize
production – which is to say, value-productive labor, and therefore
corporeal performance. Capital’s geographical expansion outwards is
accompanied by a corporeal corkscrewing inward. Therefore, the visual,
the cultural, the imaginal and the digital – as the
de/re-terriorialization of plantation and factory dressage, Protestant
ethics, manners and the like – are functionalized as gradients of
control over production and necessarily therefore of struggle. This
struggle for shares of social wealth is at once over images and within
images.

The movement from print and semiotics to visuality and affect, which
could broadly be said to characterize the current politico- economic
transition from the paradigm of the factory to that of the social
factory, dialectically produces the increasing slippage of the signifier
from the signified. This slippage and the consequent vanishing of the
Real should be historicized and thus understood as a result of the
penetration of the life-world by images; the increasing gap between
signifier and signified indexes technical degrees of social
cyberneticization and real subsumption. In historical order,
linguistics, psychoanalysis, semiotics, deconstruction, postmodernism,
virtual reality and reality-TV are all symptoms and accommodations of
the scrambling of traditional language function by the intensification
and increasing omnipresence of images. As argued in *The Cinematic Mode
of Production*, the rise of late- 19<sup>th</sup> and 20<sup>th</sup> century humanistic
disciplines can be characterized by innovations in their treatment of
language and therefore can be used to index or periodize the
quantitative intensification of visuality.[^9] Each intensification of
the disruption of linguistic function by images along with the
consequent denaturing of ‘natural’ language requires a new discipline
capable of negotiating a receding Real; the sheer quantity of visual
processing required by techno-capitalism inaugurates changes in the
qualities of thought. The linguistic commons along with its ability to
slow down images and configure the Real is put under siege by visual and
then digital culture. This siege results in a continuous and radical
re-programming of the cognitive-linguistic. The structure, functions and
capacities of words themselves today bear the mark of digitization.
Though this hypothesis remains to be demonstrated in detail, we might
glean from the mutations in the form of literature during modernity and
post-modernity the breadth and consequences of such transformations. A
line drawn from the fragmentation of narrative at the turn of the 20<sup>th</sup>
century to the veritable demise of English departments at the turn of
the 21<sup>st</sup> pretty much tells the recent story of language’s purchase on
the world. If we were serious about taking the measure of linguistic
decay, the withering of the Real, the absolute failure of semiotics and,
more generally, of representation we could ruefully add to the evidence
the 2012 U.S. Republican primary debates.

If capital expands through the development of visuality and the
consequences of visuality include the evisceration, or at the very
least, the reprogramming of linguistic capacity, then it is clear that
socio-historical categories, themselves nothing other than the
organization and semioticization of appearances, are also economic ones.
While there is significant work tracking the interpenetration of
economic vectors and those of race, nation and gender, disappointingly,
it has also been possible for a self-identified leftist political
economy to view racial and gendered formations as somehow epiphenomenal.
This is a political as well as an analytical error. ‘Race’ and ‘gender’,
which is to say race and gender as such, are from (at least) the early
modern period onward ineluctably tied to scopic regimes and therefore to
economic ones. In other words, these dynamics are constitutive of
technologies themselves. Thus it is incorrect to just state, for
example, that photography objectifies women or racial minorities.
Rather, one has to see the social role of the media platform as also
constitutive of the platform. What photography ‘is’ has everything to do
with its social functions, meaning that the objectification of women is
part of what photography is, and the legacies of colonialism and slavery
are embedded in its history and technical form.[^10] Otherwise, one
grasps a platform fetishistically, as a reification of social relations.
IBM developed the punch card to cross-reference German populations for
Nazis looking for Jews, gypsies and homosexuals during the Holocaust and
this development was a precursor to modern computing.[^11] The social
function is embedded in the machine, just as the role of computation in
financialization and in the organizing of labor practices in China is
also part of the meaning of the computer. Race and gender are endemic to
technological form and technological form is endemic to political
economy. To argue otherwise is to engage in technological determinism
and fetishistic abstraction.

The investor consolidation of major industrial media platforms, from
photography through cinema, video, reality-TV (which, for a decade at
least, has made the hyphen between ‘reality’ and ‘TV’ mandatory) and the
ambient computer is to be understood in part as a series of endeavors to
profitably manage the transformed and transforming situation of
language, race and gender vis-à-vis real transformations in
techno-social mediations. Here we might identify four fundamental visual
media shifts along with their disciplinary consequences: the visual
marking and promulgation of race and gender differences alongside modern
sociology (Stage 1: the art of photo-graphy); Hollywood’s splicings of
black musical talent onto white faces and the generalization of montage
alongside psychoanalytic attention to language’s break-down products and
the dream as rebus (Stage 2: the rise of cinema); the promulgation of a
mythically all-white, consumerist world bent on denying racism and
imperialism on U.S. television alongside deconstruction’s placing of the
signified, experience, the Real and ‘being’ under erasure (Stage 3:
television/video); the emergence of virtuality alongside the imperative
to virtuosity (Stage 4: digitality). Taken together these periodized
clusters assemble techniques of subjectivity, of profitably re-mounting
a worker-subject able to function in a political economy characterized
by the long movement of value extraction from the scene of the
plantation and factory floor to that of the deterritorialized factory,
aka the scene of the screen and the social factory. Together these
stages create the conditions of possibility for the current regime of
Global Apartheid.

Clarity about the reconfiguration of subjectivity, language function and
of interiority by the intensification of visuality, along with the
consequent recession (devaluation) of the signified (Real) vis-à-vis the
inflation of the sign (image) reveals that there is not a single
iteration of social form that is separable from political-economic
history. This dialectic further insists that we consider the
mediological basis, that is, the system of support-apparatus- procedure
that Regis Debray argues underpins ‘mediological’ transmissions (in his
view incorrectly identified for the better part of a century as
‘communication’), of some other recent endeavors to treat the
transformation of the value form and the transformed situation of
labor.[^12]

In Empire, for example, Hardt and Negri return to Marx’s idea of social
cooperation as endemic to production and argue for the real subsumption
of society by capital. This real subsumption is stated as a fact, but we
might ask how is it accomplished? What is the material basis of
subsumption? What are the media of Empire? Paolo Virno (2004) has argued
convincingly that capital has captured the cognitive-linguistic
capacities of the species. Pointedly, he argues that we are now all
virtuosos who perform speech acts in accord with ‘the score’
orchestrated by capital – this, precisely, is the operation of the
general intellect. Post-Fordist production requires virtuosity for the
maintenance of capital expansion. Our cognitive-linguistic abilities
have been conscripted and expropriated. But again, what are the
mediological conditions of possibility of post-Fordism, and what are the
raced and gendered dimensions of the ‘servility’ Virno identifies?

Relatedly, we also have the work of Maurizio Lazzarato (1996), Christian
Marazzi (2010),Tiziana Terranova (2003) on ‘free labor’ and ‘cognitive
capitalism,’ providing us with a set of post- Fordist variants in which,
given the sublime expansion of the financial system, virtuosos, by and
large, accommodate themselves and their situations to the requisites of
capitalist society in the performance of cognitive labor in a way which,
according to some of these theorists, renders value immeasurable and the
significance of post-Fordist input potentially undecidable.

One might identify in these innovative modes of conceptualization a
relatively unacknowledged debt to the apparatus theory of Louis
Althusser (1971), to feminism (Kristeva 1982, Cixous, 1994, Haraway
1991) and Marxist feminism (Fortunati, 2007; Maria Mies, 1999), to
de/post-colonial and critical race theory (Fanon, 2008; Spillers, 1987;
Spivak, 1999), and to media theory. However, the dominant post-Marxist
arguments could be more cognisant of their conditions of possibility,
both in terms of the history of raced and gendered labor (the
socio-political techne) that inaugurated the very changes in the mode of
production being theorized, and in terms of the intellectual debts owed
for their own theoretical formulations. This debt is a matter of
citational politics, clearly, but not in any simple sense. These
theories have been built upon the labor of long suffering communities as
well as on their labor of insurrection and insurrectionary critique.
For, let us agree to consider it a fact that revolutionary energies
large and small have advanced planetary intersubjectivity in their quest
for liberation even if these same energies have been domesticated by the
financialization of media platforms. We must therefore be relentlessly
critical when we observe that in spite of the mass basis of mediological
transformations, some critical micro-cultures now proceed as if the only
people worth having a conversation with are those avid readers of Badiou
and Agamben, a posture that belies the highly circumscribed standpoint
of the Franco-Italian insights. This insularity, palpable to readers
with roots and affinities in queer, of color, and global south
communities, underscores a widespread if disavowed complicity with
racism, sexism and eurocentrism in still all too Western theory.

The dearth of awareness of these multiple debts and of the historicity
of practices that form the new economic order of Empire is least true
for Terranova, who draws on feminism, cyber-feminism and critical race
theory. Because of this she is sometimes wrongly perceived as being less
original and innovative than her male counterparts. However, in arguing
that ‘the digital economy \[i\]s a specific mechanism of internal
“capture” of larger pools of social and cultural knowledge \[and that
t\]he digital economy is an important area of experimentation with value
and free cultural/affective labor,’ Terranova is clear that the exploit
of digital capitalism draws upon practices and inequalities that were
‘always and already capitalism’.[^13] In other words, for her at least,
racism and sexism are embroiled in capitalism, and it would seem
senseless to talk about (or critique) the latter in the absence of the
former.

Given these observations, one should see that the concrete elements of
the social: the ideological state apparatus, racial formations, the
visual turn, the cultural turn, the feminization of labor and the
servility and virtuosity of cognitive capitalism as part of the same
equation. This is one in which the capitalized image reconfigures
cultural praxis as a wholesale production site in ways that impose
servility and would delimit and even foreclose the emergence of
practicable anti-capitalist, anti-patriarchal, anti-racist and
anti-imperialist speech-acts. Material formations precisely delimit
speech-acts thus, because, generally speaking, the post-Fordist
attention economy still depends upon the patriarchal, white-
supremacist, imperialist organization of the global imaginary to
maximize returns. The ambient machines of the social, be they concrete
machines (cameras, cell phones, networks) or abstract machines (races,
laws, nations) are in fact real abstractions, that is, cut-n-mixable
instruments available for the virtuosic configuration of social
relations such that they adhere to the requisites of raced and gendered
capitalist exploitation.

To give but one example here of how a critique cognisant of these
relations might take form, Cindy Gao (2012) examines a series of videos
by Asian-American YouTube celebrities, including vlogs of NigaHiga and
KevJumba, and Wong Fu’s Yellow Fever, and characterizes their practice
of performing race as ‘virtuosic virtuality’.[^14] Without
essentializing identity (Gao sees the term Asian American as itself a
form of virtuality), the construct ‘virtuosic virtuality’ cranks up the
stakes of the virtual and suggests that, here at least, these
technologically enabled performances of ethnicity are subsumed by a
capitalism that still requires and indeed develops the racial regimes
that are the legacy of white supremacist capitalist patriarchy. Indeed
Gao shows that one can investigate this subsumption without insisting
that Marxism trumps critical race theory. It is rather that in making
the critique of a narrowly empowering Asian-American performativity
(narrow because achieved through the trafficking in gendered and racist
stereotypes), anti-racist and anti-capitalist critique go together. To
be a bit reductive, it is arguable that in the absence of anti-racist,
anti- capitalist critique the cultural movement is inevitably towards a
system of structural inequality that invents and indeed requires new
forms of racism – which is precisely what is going on with many of the
popular Asian-American YouTube celebrities (there are certain advances
but somebody has to pay, e.g., women, South Asians); or, the movement is
towards a critique of capitalism that sees racism as epiphenomenal
rather than constitutive and therefore uncritically replicates the
racist and eurocentric assumptions of the era.

Thus equipped we must confront the fact that increasingly, every ad we
see, every page we browse, every email we send, every word we say, every
thought we think and every dream we have is part of the production and
reproduction of capitalist society – sensuous labor 2.0. The various
media platforms, social categories, and imaginal iterations are one with
capital and these *would* script our participation in order to allow
capital to think in us and through us. I italicize ‘would’ here because
this point is both complex and contentious and appears to be moving
towards a genuine crisis. The dialectic requires that we have it both
ways. On the one hand, capitalist expropriation has never lain so
closely upon thought, utterance, the imagination and bodily practices –
it has engineered a networked cybernetic matrix of control, an
occupation that has seized the bio-social commons. Anti-racist,
anti-capitalist critique is ever more difficult to launch effectively,
since the general intellect, increasingly expropriated, thinks for
capital. On the other hand, and without doubt, real subsumption can
never be complete if it is to matter at all, which it does, if,
obviously, the thoughts (and indeed the material connections to life)
in, say, this essay, are to be anything more than a means by which you
advance your career. And whilst non-proprietary file sharing, p2p,
creative commons, copy-left, etc., are laudable endeavors, and
‘gateways’[^15] that may open to a post-capitalist society, it seems
premature to claim for any of these innovations that the medium is the
message. For these practices at present do not contain within themselves
a genuinely revolutionary critique or message (anti-racist,
anti-imperialist, prison abolitionist, environmentalist, feminist,
queer). It is not even clear that some of them are anti-capitalist.

With our language de-fanged, our critical theory suspect, and our
machines and imaginations complicit, where to turn? I suggest below that
there are discursive and aesthetic dimensions to contemporary life that
are incompletely explored. Here we must reconsider the third world, its
legacies of survival and heritable corporeal commons and the possible
non-capitalist transmission of these resources. The reconstitution of
consciousness in post- Fordism materially links each to all in ever more
intensive ways and raises question of solidarity, democracy and social
justice in new domains. As I will show, the attention economy induces a
movement from the wage to the wager, and with this shift demands an
analysis of the politics of the utterance and aesthetics of survival.

Experience teaches me that when discussing the logistics of the image
and social production/reproduction through digital interactivity and
human attention, I am obliged to add that none of these statements
regarding the violence of media-capitalism and its subsuming of the
life-world as well as many of its ‘alternatives,’ means to say that
‘prior’ forms of exploitation that are characteristic of feudal serfdom,
slavery, proletarianization, prostitution, domestic work, migrant labor,
or the labor of survival in either camps or the postmodern slum have
ceased to exist. Rather these persisting modes should be viewed as
conditions of dispossession which are coordinated and legitimated,
marginalized or made unrepresentable by the command-control apparatus of
the digital-visual via a calculus of the image that enlists our
for-profit participation in the capitalist
military-media-prison-industrial complex. From a macro-structural point
of view, human becoming is bent toward two dialectically identical ends:
capital accumulation and radical dispossession. The overall result is
the immeasurable violence of the world-wide suppression of democratic
becoming. We participate in this totalitarian systemic practice despite
the relatively clear facts that the earth is headed towards
environmental catastrophe and that two billion people (the entire
population of Earth in 1929) are even now laboring to survive actually
existing Armageddon. Given their intimate and indeed inescapable
connection to the world media- system and the attention economy, the
dispossessed have thus become the living substrate of contemporary
systems of representation.[^16] We write our revolutionary tracts on the
backs of slaves. Radical dispossession as the other side of a
world-media system is in the most literal sense the condition of
possibility for our contemporary thought and writing. It bears asking,
under what image or images do the radically dispossessed labor? And
also, what’s it to you?

The questions I pose at this point concern the images written over and
on the historically produced informatic black hole smothering the bottom
two billion denizens of postmodern globality. They are questions about
subalterns whom I have come to think should never be designated by the
sign bare life, but, at the very least, by the sign ‘bare life,’ now in
quotation marks. The quotation marks are there in order that the
signifier registers its own constitutive performativity in relation to
those who are being signified upon. ‘Bare life’ neither merely exists
nor merely appears but by virtue of a signifying process – a signifying
industrial complex – that codifies its messages on bodies presumed to be
incapacitated and unaccommodated to such an extent that they are beyond
the reach of dialogue. These bodies are thereby made to signify the
limit of sociality and presumed to exist in a condition of social death.
My point here is that whether it is Agamben selling philosophy books or
bankers and policy-makers selling bailouts and weapons, we find bodies
and populations being constituted as surfaces of inscription: bodies
whose living labor of survival serves to make them fodder for
philosophy, statistics, political theory, entrepreneurs, militaries,
banks and states. Subalterns are actively configured as the living
substrate of representation for capitalist mediation. In other words,
the unceasing dis-figuration of the masses is the price of success, but
the success belongs to someone else: the celebrity capitalists,
militarized nations, and some of their aspirant followers. Such is the
enclosure wrought by the world of technical images. Squatters,
trash-pickers, illegals, displaced populations, post-modern slaves, and
billions for whom we here have no names and whose deaths will not appear
in any newspaper, attend to the historically imposed exigencies of life.
Their attention to the world-machine of survival, their endeavors to
constitute themselves in myriad ways, underpin the spectacular-digital
of meaning, agency, and global citizenship. For the world-media system,
subaltern survival or death is mere raw material for semiotics, affect
and intensity. As threat, tragedy, irrational irruption or non-entity,
entire populations are bundled and sold, converted into semiotic and
affective chits for capital’s master-gamers.

We must register the violence endemic to the conversion of historically
dispossessed others into images and signs – in addition to objects (a
concern central to the work of the young urban photo- graffiti artist
JR) – because in being figured as bare life, multitudes, refugees,
tribes, slum-dwellers, or terrorists, and even when not being figured at
all, the capitalized universe of images and signs constitutes and
de-constitutes these beings (this flesh, to borrow from Hortense
Spillers, 1987) for its own purposes. As entity, non-entity, iPad,
auto-part, rare-earth metal, securitized population or void, the now
doubly dispossessed are materially and symbolically disappeared for
politico-economic ends. In other words, not only global commodity-chain
production (which relies on disappeared labor 1.0) but planetary
semiosis and affect-formation (which relies on disappeared labor 2.0)
are rooted in the biomass of a planet of persons excluded not just from
meaningful dialogue, but from dialogue. It should be underscored that
the movement from 1.0 to 2.0 is a movement that took place over a matter
of centuries of racialization and gendered violence but is today
‘noticeable’ which is to say ‘theoriseable’ because the chickens are
coming home to roost. As Césaire remarked, what was unforgiveable about
the Holocaust, was not the brutality, torture and murder, what was
unforgiveable was that the techniques of colonization were applied to
white people.[^17] People of the Global South were the first ‘content
providers.’ Now the situation is generalized.

Understood in this way, it would appear that the result of not just
history, but also of the history of representation – representation now
‘fully’ captured by capital, and shunted into an informatics matrix in
which capital structures images and images structure sign function, and
sign function is endemic to social production and reproduction – has
been to make democracy structurally impossible. Such is the ‘reality’
for which the recession of the Real stands as symptom. The material
foreclosure of the logic endemic to the conceit of human being is the
technical achievement that provides the historical explanation for
‘being’ being placed under erasure in the realm of the sign.
Understanding philosophically, as it were, that with the expiration of
Western metaphysics one also confronts the expiration of humanism and
the conceits pertaining to ‘the human’ follows logically; however
understanding mediologically that this emptying out of tradition called
post-structuralism is consequent upon the historico-material conversion
and therefore demotion of ‘natural language’ into one medium among media
requires a materialist approach to the totality of informatic networks
that avowedly post-dialectical and post-historical thought cannot easily
accommodate. Admittedly, it might take a book-length study to properly
historicize Jacques Derrida’s *Of Grammatology* and to methodologically
‘comprehend’ the moment in intellectual history known as
‘deconstruction’ as a specific symptom of and in the long historical
process of uprooting and eviscerating language. Nonetheless, one might
speculate that the ‘being’ under erasure there was formerly assumed to
be part of the commons. As Kwame Anthony Appiah question indicated in
‘Is the Post- in Postmodernism the Post- in Postcolonial?’ there is an
intimate connection between the erosion of the birthrights of colonized
peoples and the erosion of the Western birthright purportedly guaranteed
by Western metaphysics. For our purposes here we may grasp that in both
the material and philosophical domains the basis and the rationale for
democracy have been steadily eroded. This somewhat controversial
hypothesis affirms what has been discernible at least since the onset of
post- modernity: because of shifts in the matrix of representation and
its material underpinnings, under advanced capitalism neither reality
nor being can be adequately mounted and sustained and thus neither
democratic representation nor perhaps democracy is possible. From a
technical perspective this is an advance. Dialectically speaking, from
this historically achieved and instrumental condition of generalized
simulation there is no return.

Put another way, having reached historically the general fulfillment of
what Marx saw clearly as the specific experience of the wage-laborer,
namely ‘the loss of reality,’ the real is gone and thus the
aestheticization of politics is complete. It would seem that Communism
must respond by politicizing simulation, which is to say, the universe
of appearances mediated by abstraction, which is to say, in short,
everything, however we must leave the very question of ‘the political’
along with the transformed ontology of ‘politics’ itself for another
time.

### Reference List

Althusser, L. ‘Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses,*’ Lenin and
Philosophy and Other Essays*, trans. B. Brewster, Monthly Review Press,
1971.

Beller, J. *The Cinematic Mode of Production: Attention Economy and the
Society of the Spectacle*, Lebanon, NH: Dartmouth University Press,
2006.

Beller, J. ‘Paying Attention’, *Cabinet* 24, 2008,
http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/24/beller.php .

Beller, J. ‘Camera Obscura After All: The Racist Writing With Light’, in
Jonathan Beller (ed.) *The Scholar and Feminist Online, Special Issue:
Feminist Media Theory, Iterations of Social Difference*, 2012.

Black, E. *IBM and the Holocaust: The Strategic Alliance Between Nazi
Germany and America’s Most Powerful Corporation*, Washington, D.C.:
Dialog Press, 2012.

Césaire, A. *Discourse on Colonialism*, trans. J. Pinkham, New York and
London: Monthly Review Press, 1972.

Cixous, H. *The Helene Cixous Reader*, New York and London: Routledge,
1994.

Cubitt, S. ‘The Political Economy of Cosmopolis’ in T. Scholz (ed.)
*Digital Labor*, New York and London: Routledge, 2012.

Debray, R. *Media Manifestos*, London: Verso, 1996.

Fanon, F. *Black Skin, White Masks*, New York: Grove Press, 2008.

Fortunati, L. ‘Immaterial Labor and Its Mechanisation’ in *ephemera*
7(1, 2007): 139-157.

Flusser, V. *Towards a Philosophy of Photography*, trans. A. Matthews,
London: Reaktion Books, 2000.

Gao, C. ‘Virtuosic Virtuality of Asian American Youtube Stars,’ in
Jonathan Beller (ed.) *The Scholar and Feminist Online, Special Issue:
Feminist Media Theory, Iterations of Social Difference*, 2012.

Haraway, D. ‘A Cyborg Manifesto,’ in *Simians, Cyborgs and Women*. New
York and London: Routledge, 1991.

Hoffman, D. ‘Violent Virtuosity: Visual Labor in West Africa’s Mano
River War,’ *Anthropological Quarterly*, Vol. 84, no. 4 (Fall, 2011):
949-976.

Jay, M. ‘Scopic Regimes of Modernity’, in *Vision and Visuality*, New
York: The New Press, 1988.

Kristeva, J. *Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection*, New York:
Columbia University Press, 1982.

Lazzarato, M. ‘Immaterial Labour’ in M. Hardt. & P. Virno (eds),
*Radical Thought in Italy: A Potential Politics*, Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1996, pp. 133-147.

Marazzi, C. *The Violence of Financial Capitalism*, New York:
Semiotext(e), 2010.

Mies, M. *Patriarchy and Accumulation on a World Scale*, London: Zed
Books, 1999.

Spillers, H. ‘Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar Book,’
*diacritics* 17: 2 (Summer, 1987): 65-81.

Spivak, G. *A Critique of Postcolonial Reason*, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1999.

Terranova, T. ‘Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy’,
2003,
http://www.electronicbookreview.com/thread/technocapitalism/voluntary.

Virno, P. *A Grammar of the Multitude*, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2004.

Zizek, S. ‘The Revolt of the Salaried Bourgeoisie’, *London Review of
Books*, Vol. 34 No. 2, (26 January, 2012): 9-10.

[^1]: J. Beller, *The Cinematic Mode of Production: Attention Economy
    and the Society of the Spectacle*, Lebanon, NH: Dartmouth University
    Press, 2006.

[^2]: V. Flusser, *Towards a Philosophy of Photography*, trans. A.
    Matthews. London: Reaktion Books, 2000, p. 27.

[^3]: L. Althusser, ‘Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses,*’ Lenin
    and Philosophy and Other Essays*, trans. B. Brewster, Monthly Review
    Press, 1971.

[^4]: P. Virno, *A Grammar of the Multitude*, Cambridge: MIT Press,
    2004.

[^5]: S. Zizek, ‘The Revolt of the Salaried Bourgeoisie’, *London Review
    of Books*, Vol. 34 No. 2, (26 January, 2012): 9-10.

[^6]: D. Hoffman, ‘Violent Virtuosity: Visual Labor in West Africa’s
    Mano River War,’ *Anthropological Quarterly*, Vol. 84, no. 4 (Fall,
    2011): 949-976.

[^7]: Hoffman, ‘Violent Virtuosity’, p. 952

[^8]: First source: M. Jay, ‘Scopic Regimes of Modernity,’ In *Vision
    and Visuality*, New York: The New Press, 1988. Second source:
    Debray, R. *Media Manifestos*. London: Verso, 1996.

[^9]: J. Beller, *The Cinematic Mode of Production: Attention Economy
    and the Society of the Spectacle*, Lebanon, NH: Dartmouth University
    Press, 2006.

[^10]: J. Beller, ‘Camera Obscura After All: The Racist Writing With
    Light,’ In Jonathan Beller (ed.) *The Scholar and Feminist Online,
    Special Issue: Feminist Media Theory, Iterations of Social
    Difference*, 2012.

[^11]: E. Black, *IBM and the Holocaust: The Strategic Alliance Between
    Nazi Germany and America’s Most Powerful Corporation*, Washington,
    D.C.: Dialog Press, 2012.

[^12]: R. Debray, *Media Manifestos*.

[^13]: T. Terranova, ‘Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital
    Economy’, 2003,
    http://www.electronicbookreview.com/thread/technocapitalism/voluntary.

[^14]: C. Gao, ‘Virtuosic Virtuality of Asian American Youtube Stars,’
    In Jonathan Beller (ed.) *The Scholar and Feminist Online, Special
    Issue: Feminist Media Theory, Iterations of Social Difference*,
    2012.

[^15]: S. Cubitt, ‘The Political Economy of Cosmopolis’ in T. Scholz.
    (ed.) *Digital Labor*, New York and London: Routledge, 2012.

[^16]: J. Beller, ‘Paying Attention’, *Cabinet 24* (2008),
    http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/24/beller.php.

[^17]: A. Césaire, *Discourse on Colonialism*, trans. J. Pinkham, New
    York and London: Monthly Review Press, 1972.
