# Neutralizing Engaged Subjects in the Creative City

### Josephine Berry Slater

*This article is a version of a lecture given by the author in the
course ‘Biopolitics and Aesthetics’, Centre for Cultural Studies at
Goldsmiths University.*

During the Blair government, a new criminal offence was passed for
nearly every day spent in office – this period saw the biggest expansion
in the legal regulation of conduct of any time since the end of WW2.
This was also a period which saw an explosion in the commissioning of
public art across Britain – a commissioning frenzy, buoyed by the
liquidity of the financial bubble, which has consequently been called
‘the public art bubble’. I think these phenomena can be linked, because
what they represent are two prongs of a pincer that form a
governmentality that acts to engage and activate subjects with the one
prong, while neutralizing them with the other. Or put another way, it
acts to engage certain capacities, conducts and valorizable behaviors –
not least the participation in aesthetic spectatorship – while at the
same time disabling, discouraging and disallowing other forms of conduct
deemed disruptive to the smooth functioning of the state and some of its
principle activities; namely the production of a large enough, healthy,
peaceable, active and economically productive population. These two
phenomena – the offence bubble and the public art bubble – can also be
linked as governmental strategies for managing the antagonisms and
painful inequalities of neoliberal capitalism as it comes to bear upon
the everyday spaces of life in post-industrial urban society.

We are looking at a complicated conjunction of issues – neoliberal urban
development, the legal regulation of behavior, and the role of public
art within the post-industrial city; each has its own specificities,
developmental history and extensive body of knowledge attached. But what
I want to do here is to thread them together according to certain
‘regulatory ideas’, as Michel Foucault would say, which intersect and
bind together aesthetic, governmental and economic fields. The first
ones I want to think about are the concepts of ‘event’ and ‘milieu’. The
act-painting of the ’40s and ’50s, and the Happenings of the ’60s swept
the artwork clean first of representation, and then more broadly of
‘retinality’ as art departed pictorial and sculptural frameworks, in a
bid to convene a space in which something, an ‘act’ and later an
‘event’, could occur. These twinned notions of ‘act’ and ‘event’ are
deeply implicated in the multiple breaching of the art/life divide
undertaken by neo-avant-garde artists of this period, and presuppose
art’s ability to reach out of itself to effect some kind of wider
transformation of life and the world around it, whether that be: the
life of the artist or the viewer as it coincides with a set of
materials, ideas or conditions during the act of creation; the way parts
of the sensorium and cognitive apparatus become newly open and
differently sensitized through an encounter with art – what Rancière
calls the ‘redistribution of the sensible’; or art’s wider, subtle and
unknowable infection of the social and physical environment,
‘indirectly, as a stored code’, as Kaprow put it.

Essential to the myriad possible manifestations of the ‘event’ is the
notion that it takes place in an ‘expanded field’ that entails a
potentially infinite series of elements; a field that admits new
contextual, environmental, social, sensual, emotional, institutional,
political and material dimensions into the conception of the artwork.
This expansion could be understood as a growing reflection on and
recursive folding inwards of the artwork’s relationality. This folding
inwards of the world, and unfurling outwards of the artwork, leads in
numerous directions, from minimalism, to conceptualism to institutional
critique, from body art, to performance to media art and net art, and so
on. However, we need to maintain our focus on the notion of ‘event’ as a
specific aspect of the artwork’s expanded field of signification in
order to induce an understanding of how developments in art are
reflective of those of biopolitical governmentality and, for our
purposes here, within the neoliberal moment of urban development. We
also need to think about how the extension and flexibilization of the
artwork makes itself newly available to deployment within a governmental
and economic expansion that operates upon ever finer fissures of
subjectivity.

In his lecture series *Security, Territory, Population* (1977-78),
Foucault discusses – in the context of the development of the modern
state and its governmental rationality – the mid-17<sup>th</sup> century production
of a new spatial relationship of sovereignty to its territory, one in
which the capital city comes to the fore. He concentrates on a text
called *La Métropolitée*, written by a French protestant émigré called
Alexandre Le Maitre, for the protestant kind of Sweden. In it Le Maitre
puts forwards general recommendations for the good spatial layout of a
territory; one which will open up the territory to the ‘general network
of the sovereign’s orders and controls’. Without getting too distracted
by the detail of his schema, what Foucault seizes on is how he draws
together the problems of sovereignty with a set of specifically urban
problematics. He writes,

>In short, the interesting thing is Le Maitre dreams of connecting the political effectiveness of sovereignty to a spatial distribution. A good sovereign, be it a collective or individual sovereign, is someone well placed within a territory, and a territory that is well policed in terms of its obedience to the sovereign is a territory that has a good spatial layout.[^1]

For Le Maitre, the capital city is the ultimate arena for the production
of an ideal set of spatial conditions of sovereignty, and the exemplary
life it will induce and that will act as a model for the entire
territory. Foucault then tracks the changing relationship between the
development of towns and cities in the context of the production of a
new ‘*raison d’État*’, or state reason, which began to see the
population as the state’s defining strength and, in response, developed
a whole series of techniques to safeguard, nurture and monitor
populations. Towns and cities, naturally, became a focal point for these
developing techniques as a new rationality of the state met the demands
for growth, increased production and circulation imposed by a burgeoning
capitalism. And here, with this new ‘securitized’, expanded and
speculative approach to city planning, is where we connect back to the
notion of the event.

Looking at the development of French cities such as Nantes and Vigny in
the 18<sup>th</sup> century, Foucault identifies not only a response to the
requirement to open up cities in order to better connect them to
external routes, to deal with overcrowding and to eliminate dangerous
elements and so-called miasmas, but also a new consideration of possible
future events that are not precisely knowable or controllable. The
calculation with and management of an indefinite series of accumulating
and mobile units – ‘circulation, x number of carts, x number of
passers-by, x number of thieves, x number of miasmas, and so on’ – is,
he says, the essential characteristic of the mechanism of security. As
opposed to the ‘disciplinary’ structuring of space (here he means, the
hierarchical spatial orderings of the Middle Ages) the securitized
structuring of space ‘will try to plan a milieu in terms of events or
series of events or possible elements, \[…\] that will have to be
regulated within a multivalent and transformable network.’[^2] He
ventures a further definition: ‘The space in which a series of uncertain
elements unfold is, I think, roughly what one can call the milieu.’[^3]
Borrowing the concept of ‘milieu’ from biology, and imposing it
retrospectively onto the problem of city planning in this era of 17<sup>th</sup>
century *Raison d’État*, Foucault continues,

> The milieu is a certain number of combined overall effects bearing on all who live in it. It is an element in which a circular link is produced between effects and causes… More disease will obviously mean more deaths. More deaths will mean more cadavers and consequently more miasmas, and so on. \[…\] Finally, the milieu appears as a field of intervention in which, instead of affecting individuals as a set of legal subjects capable of voluntary actions \[…\] or as a multiplicity of organisms, of bodies capable of performances – one tries to affect, precisely, a population. I mean a multiplicity of individuals who are and fundamentally and essentially only exist biologically bound to the materiality within which they live. \[…\] What one tries to reach through this milieu, is precisely the conjunction of a series of events produced by these individuals, population, and groups and quasi natural events which occur around them.[^4]

In this lecture series, Foucault goes on to argue and demonstrate how
this urban model of sovereignty, one that he says is extended
paradigmatically to the whole territory in the form of the police state,
will give way to a more agriculturally focused model of governmentality
in the 18^th^ century. His argument here is subtle: the mode of state
rationality developed in the 17^th^ century, that he identifies as
*raison d’État*, entails a logic that concedes that the state is its own
manifest destiny – it no longer imagines itself as becoming an empire,
or ultimately as merging with the cosmic unity and temporality of the
heavens. It is held in a balance of power, after the Treaty of
Westphalia in 1648, with the other European states, and now turns
inwards, discovering the utility of its own population which it starts
to police in the interests of population expansion (which promised the
freedom to pay lower wages), increased activity, greater levels of
commodity production, higher levels of export and hence growing revenues
to the treasury coffers.

This logic changes, however, to some degree in the 18<sup>th</sup> century, with
the advent of the physiocrats and the *économistes*. While *raison
d’État* is retained in so far as the state still regards itself, its
continuation, as its aim and destiny, nevertheless it is filled with a
different content. This involves a refinement of its method of
governmentality, from one of state intervention and control (the police
state), to one of *laissez-faire*. So instead of extending the spatial
model of the city to the entire territory – because it is in the city
that the techniques of security and policing are developed – the idea is
to ‘let nature take its course’. In regards to grain production, for
example, the idea was to get rid of price controls and the control of
import and export. This way production would be self-regulating,
responding more agilely to the market value of grain, and ultimately
better avoid the grain shortages and famines that were a frequent result
of state intervention. The peasants would be better off, better fed and
more productive.

Without wishing to go too deeply into this historical sequence, what is
important is that Foucault argues both in *Security, Territory,
Population* and *The Birth of Biopolitics* that from the 18<sup>th</sup> century,
an ‘art of government’ came to replace the more disciplinary and
interventionist governmental reason that preceded it, and that this
later art of government would retain the population as its focus – but
strive to fulfil the interests of the state (higher levels of
production, greater circulation and export of goods etc.) through an
*economic* reason. This economic art of government is based on the
notion, formulated by Adam Smith, of the ‘secret hand of the market’; a
quasi-natural force that can better settle the balance of competing
interests than any more rigid and partial intervention of the state.

However, what is important here, and for our thinking about the links
between the aesthetic blurring of art and life and biopower, is that the
economic governmental reason retains the centrality of the ‘event’ and
the ‘milieu’, the speculative balancing of a set of variables, which is
expanded outwards from the setting of the town and its conditions, to
the whole complexion of factors, interests and conditions that it needs
to balance – one that would increasingly resolve into what we call ‘the
economy’. Perhaps we can even go as far as to say that *the economy is
‘the event’ par excellence* of this governmental rationality. As
Foucault states many times, this entails a population-scale thinking –
one which departs from earlier, religious or pastoral models of
sovereignty in which the entire flock must be sacrificed to save a
single soul, and conversely, the single soul must be sacrificed for the
salvation of the flock – an economy of souls in which every individual
matters. With biopower, what we see is the state intervening only

>To regulate, or rather to allow the well-being, the interest of each to adjust itself in such a way that it can actually serve all. The state is envisioned as the regulator of interests and no longer as the transcendent and synthetic principle of the transformation of the happiness of each into the happiness of all.[^5]

In this respect, the individual ceases to be important, and of interest;
but the conditions affecting the mass of interactions between
individuals, the ‘multiplicity of individuals’, indeed the population,
becomes the site of state intervention. I want to take a bit of a leap
of argumentative faith, and suggest that we can plot a related
development in art from the presiding concern with the individual object
– the ‘hard object’ – as it is sometimes called with reference to
sculpture, to an increasingly distributed aesthetic field of attention
and concern. It is interesting to consider this shift in terms of a
movement from the depth model of the Christian and enlightenment
subject, in which all orders of experience are of moral if not economic
importance, to a flattened model of the secular and biopolitical subject
in which the individual becomes a moment, or the centre of a contingent
set of effects, within a mobile series of interactions. We must, of
course, be careful to distinguish between the objectives of a
governmental reason concerned primarily with the economic and its
attendant, opportune conditions of life, and the motivating forces
behind this diffusion of the artwork into a relational field. Or, put
another way, the reorientation of the aesthetic field of attention from
the single object often involves a critique of individuality which heads
in a very different direction from the biopolitical reconception of
individuality as a unit of interaction within a field of forces and
effects; one of a variety of mobile units that comprise the ‘milieu’ and
the ‘event’.

Roland Barthes’ concept of the ‘death of the author’ and the ‘birth of
the reader’ can be related to the notion of ‘singularity’ – that which
defies the opposition between universal and particular, general and
individual, to grasp a sense by which all universalities are
particularized, given as such, but only in so far as the particular
occurs this way, but could always occur otherwise; the characteristics
of the particular are both being as it is, as it has occurred, but
neither are they all that could potentially occur. This balance, and
refusal of the general and the particular, one that allows for all the
potential unrealized forms of Being in so far as it embraces Being as
such, is what Giorgio Agamben calls the ‘whatever singularity’. The
relinquishing of the author, or the hard object, or representation, or
technique, or retinality are all maneuvers through which a space is
cleared, or rather a milieu is opened, grasped and excavated within
which there is potential for something, the *whatever*, to occur within
– call it an ‘act’, an ‘event’ or a ‘singularity’. This potential to be
otherwise, or merely this *potential for potential*, is related but
antithetical to Foucault’s concept of governmental securization in which
potential occurrences are speculated on and allowed for within a system
or plan that must be able to accommodate, respond to, neutralize or make
use of a spectrum of potential events. For the security state the event
is *pre*cuperated into a social and economic equilibrium; in the best
relational artworks, the event’s effects resist being put to work – they
may even resist being consciously identified or understood, and operate
more as a ‘stored code’, an unspent power with unknowable potential
future manifestations – a whatever singularity.

Returning to the problematic of the city in its neoliberal mode of
development – it is important to note the transition that occurred in
the 1980s from the process of ‘gentrification’ to the state-led
stimulation of ‘urban regeneration’. Gentrification is a term coined by
sociologist Ruth Glass in 1964 to describe the movement of affluent
individuals into lower class areas of the city. The state simulation of
this apparently ad hoc activity is what has been named ‘regeneration’. I
want to think about how this governmental simulation, or forced
stimulation of a process deemed natural, bears all the hallmarks of
neoliberalism’s schizophrenic need to posit the naturalness of the
market’s ordering of social and economic processes on the one hand,
while constantly needing to intervene to produce the correct conditions
within which ‘nature’ can take its course. Here we will consider the
role that creativity and public art is given in the production of a set
of conditions which not only apparently stimulate growth, but also
affect the behavior of subjects, of city dwellers, rendering them
compatible with the desired trajectory of growth, productivity, and
active social participation. How, in other words, the public display of
creativity helps valorize life within an economic and biopolitical
rationality. Part of this process of valorization is also, of course, to
pre-empt, drive out and mask over those subjects and behaviors that
cannot be put to use. In this sense, we can think about how
securitization extends to creativity – perhaps we can call this the
‘securitization of creativity’.

So, as noted, initially considered an ad hoc, *natural* phenomenon,
gentrification has increasingly been engineered by first local and now
global networks of real estate developers and speculators in step with
local governments. It should immediately be said that the outcome of
gentrification is usually one of increased property prices, increased
revenue to local governments from property taxes and the displacement of
lower income populations. The advent of ‘urban regeneration’ in the
early 1980s was largely a state-led response to the blighting of the
inner city in the wake of the twin phenomena of deindustrialization and
suburbanization.[^6] In the UK, it was also part of a governmental
response to a virulent wave of riots that erupted across Britain’s
streets in the summer of 1981, from London’s Brixton, Liverpool’s
Toxteth, Birmingham’s Handsworth, to Leeds’ Chapeltown. During this hot
summer, dispossessed populations vented their rage and contempt for a
system that treated them as surplus to requirement; both neglecting and
harassing them by turns. These riots – often cast as race riots – were
not only a response to high unemployment (or Thatcher’s planned
unemployment), biting poverty and the degenerating of housing stock, but
also the aggressive policing of the non-white working class population
who were subjected to discriminatory and heavy-handed policing, under
‘sus’ law – the police power to stop and search preemptively, purely on
the basis of suspicion. Poet Levi Tafari put it this way:

> Living inna Liverpool is living in hell look pon the places where we have fe dwell them have we under a political spell bad housing unemployment and the depression as well.[^7]

And how did the British state respond to the uprising and discontent of
significant pockets of its population? Then Secretary of the
Environment, Michael Heseltine, was dispatched around the country in a
helicopter, to consult with so-called community leaders. The outcome? A
series of ‘Garden Festivals’ around the UK, which offer an early model
of ‘cultural’ regeneration. These festivals combined the production of a
series of ornamental gardens with pop-cultural hagiography – in
Liverpool, for instance, the festival included a yellow submarine and a
statue of John Lennon. They were typically placed in derelict industrial
sites near to working class areas, and unlocked large tranches of public
money to clear sites, purify land, improve transport links and
eventually transfer land to private developers. At each of the Garden
Festival sites, special agencies such as the Merseyside Development
Corporation were established to attract private capital investment and
lead regeneration in areas undergoing post-industrial decline; these
QUANGOs were directly appointed by the minister and overrode local
authority planning controls – a measure which would pre-empt later
large-scale redevelopment projects of the 90s and 00s.

This mode of addressing social unrest and infrastructural decline
exhibits several characteristics of the biopolitical governmentality we
have been discussing. The decision to clear, purify and deregulate
public lands constitutes a massive subsidy to the private sector which
is courted and effectively underwritten to take over the state’s
previous role of city development. (Soon after the festivals had ended,
most of the expensively treated land they occupied was sold off to
developers – an outcome that made the entire cultural experiment seem
like mere foreplay). This is a prime example of the schizophrenic
genuflecting to and artificial stimulation of market activity which is
apparently better able to regulate social and economic activity than the
state. This is also what David Harvey has termed the ‘entrepreneurial’
mode of municipal government which no longer directly addresses the
material and social needs of inhabitants through the provision of
services and the planning, building and maintenance of infrastructure,
but which instead presents cities and city districts as attractive
commodities whose inhabitants provide ‘social and cultural capital’ –
effectively, just another business opportunity competing against others
for inward investment from portfolio capitalists. Cultural events and
signature art and architecture are of course key to this branding and
selling of the city – a familiar strategy which explains much of the
state subsidized public art bubble of the boom years.

Another key biopolitical characteristic witnessed in the response of the
Thatcher government to the misery and desperation of inner-city
populations is the use of the ‘state of exception’ witnessed through the
suspension of local planning laws within designated parts of the city.
Actions such as these expose the state’s ultimate externality to its own
laws which must, Foucault argues, be temporarily suspended in order to
attain the very ends of the state, namely its perpetuation. (We should
note, however, that Agamben sees the state of exception as having become
sovereignty’s permanent condition of operation within capitalism).[^8]
Quoting Chemnitz, the 17<sup>th</sup> century political theorist, Foucault
describes the relationship of the state to its own laws thus:

> In fact, raison d’État must command, not by ‘sticking to the laws,’ but, if necessary, it must command ‘the laws themselves, which must adapt to the present state of the republic’. So, the coup d’État does not break with raison d’État. It is an element, an event, a way of doing things that, as something that breaches the laws \[…\] falls entirely within the general horizon, the general form of raison d’État.[^9]

The *coup d’État* itself must happen almost without the population
knowing, under the blanket of darkness and secrecy, presenting it with a
*fait accompli*. It is interesting to consider the role of culture as
part of the theatrical *mise-en-scene* that allows this micro-*coup
d’État* to occur. The yellow submarine blinds us from the real,
underlying economic exchanges.

A further biopolitically paradigmatic aspect of the Thatcher
government’s response was its attempt to intervene in the conditions of
life to produce effects of ‘happiness’ and ‘well-being’ as a way of
maintaining control and boosting the co-operation and productive
activity of its subjects. Speaking of the development of policing in the
17<sup>th</sup> century, during the emergence of *raison d’État*, Foucault writes,

> So with the police there is a circle that starts from the state as a power of rational and calculated intervention on individuals and comes back to the state as a growing set of forces, or forces to be developed, passing through the life of individuals, which will now be precious to the state simply as life.[^10]

He goes on to say that this circle will pass through more than just the
life of individuals, but through their ‘convenience’, their ‘amenity’,
something which amounts to ‘more than just living’ – all of which the
police were charged with ensuring through their surveillance, regulation
and control of the dense interactions between individuals, especially in
the towns and cities. This concern for the individual’s ‘better than
just living’ he writes,

> Must in some way be drawn on and constituted into state utility: making men’s happiness the state’s utility, making men’s happiness the very strength of the state.[^11]

Although Foucault describes the police state as a 17<sup>th</sup> century
phenomenon, something which recedes firstly within the ideology of
*laissez-faire*, and later neoliberalism’s apparent deregulatory
activity, I think it is clear that the conjunction of what we could call
population optimization, short-handed as the ‘nanny state’ and its
proliferating interventions into life, and the utilitarian deployment of
happiness, shorthanded as the culture industry, suggest that this
correlation of police work and the manufacture of happiness hasn’t
disappeared but only shifted form. The roll out of an alternating
sequence of either mega-sculptures (Gormley’s *Angel of the North*,
Wallinger’s proposed *White Horse* at Ebbsfleet, and Kapoor’s
*ArcelorMittal Orbit* tower for the Olympic site), or relational and
ephemeral urban interventions, reveals something of the uneasy marriage
of agendas that conspire around public art to help deliver the effects
of happiness the state so badly needs to gain the acquiescence and
self-regulation of subjects within the context of large-scale urban
change.

It is precisely this conjunction of happiness and control that
philosopher Maria Muhle wants to emphasize through her rejection of
those characterizations of biopower that cast it as an aggressive
takeover of life. Instead, she argues, it is a modality that possesses a
positive and not merely repressive relation to life. ‘My claim’, she
writes, ‘is that biopolitics is defined by the fact that rather than
merely relating to life, it takes on the way life itself functions; that
it functions like life in order to be better able to regulate it.’[^12]
So there are positive and pleasurable aspects to the governmental
subsumption of life – its life-like activity – that relate to art’s
desire to be more like-life and less like the moribund objects within
the museum. Indeed, the production of this ‘positive’ relation, often
entails the deployment of art for governmental and economic ends – as
has been amply demonstrated by the paradigm of the Creative City. The
general aestheticization of urban spaces certainly helps mark off the
disciplinary city of factory work from the securitized city of
immaterial production and consumption. The pain, filth and graft of
production is increasingly purged from our cities (or at least from
view), and with it the workers who performed this graft. In its place
comes the illusion of our general conversion to a pleasurable,
weightless form of production, and the accompanying figure of what in
German is called the ‘*Bummler’*, the ambler, the Bourgeois enjoyer of
the city as a playground rich in cultural and retail diversions. No
longer the austere streets of factory towns, but the slick and
virtualized pedestrian zones of creative quarters, in which people’s
happiness is catered to, life is deemed ‘more than just lived’, and art
contributes invaluably to a cultivation and passification of public
space. But it is not just the use of art for the production of happiness
effects and place branding, I would argue, that creates discomfort for
the more conscious practitioners, but the sharing of certain
characteristics by aesthetic and governmental regimes. Beyond a shared
orientation towards the event and the milieu – complex fields of
interrelation between life, activity and environment which entail a
speculative approach to potential effects – there are other key
‘regulatory ideas’ operative in both realms, namely the concepts of
‘engagement’ and ‘openness’.

In a recent interview about making art in the context of regeneration
with the artist Alberto Duman, we discussed how the ‘hard object’ had
been relegated in public art practice over the last decade or so.[^13]
He drew attention to how the sculptural tradition in public art has
given way to ‘a situation where everything but the object is the way to
do public art’, the normativity of which he finds disturbing. According
to art historian Miwon Kwon, in her book *One Place After Another*, this
normative switchover came with the critical reception of the public art
exhibition *Culture in Action*, curated by Jane Jacob, in Chicago in
1993. It is worth quoting the curator’s assessment of the trajectory
from the site-specific object to the community-oriented public artwork
to be reminded of how this development was unequivocally linked to
progressive social effects, and actively delinked from the development
agendas we now see harnessing it. She writes,

> As public art shifted away from large-scale objects, to physically or conceptually site specific projects, to audience specific concerns (work made in response to those who occupy a given site), it moved from an aesthetic function, to a design function, to a social function. Rather than serving to promote the economic development of American cities, as did public art beginning in the late 1960s, it is now being viewed as a means of stabilizing community development through urban centers. In the 1990s the role of public art has shifted from that of renewing the physical environment to that of improving society, from promoting aesthetic quality to contributing to the quality of life, from enriching lives to saving lives.[^14]

What is interesting here is not only how she counters socially-oriented
public art to economic development, but also how governmental her
language sounds when she cites the objectives of this kind of work:
‘stabilizing community development’ and ‘improving society’ and
‘improving the quality of life’, not to mention the extraordinary
grandiosity of her claim that art can save lives. Running through this
equation of art’s social orientation with ameliorating social effects is
the implicit idea that the art can serve to activate members of the
‘community,’ to ‘engage’ them in constructive dialogues, to alter their
behavior. This conception of activated spectatorship, and its coupling
to the blurring of art and life, presents a crucial isomorphism between
aesthetics and the self-management of the subject that biopolitical
info-capitalism attempts to stage. Present here is also a kind of crass
identification between notions of engaged spectatorship and a
literalization of activity that attempts to draw out aesthetic
contemplation into immediate behavioral and social effects. In his book
*The Emancipated Spectator*, Jacques Rancière exposes what he considers
the *cul-de-sac* of avant-garde notions of activating the audience, from
Bertolt Brecht to Guy Debord, for the imposition, finally, of a
prescriptive and ‘sovereign’ notion of what counts as activity onto an
audience contemptuously imagined as unrelentingly passive, as victims of
the spectacle. Speaking of the wish to abolish the separation of active
performers from passive spectators, or between the spaces of art and
everyday life, in avant-garde theatre he says,

>  But the redistribution of places is one thing; the requirement that
theatre assign itself the goal of assembling a community which ends
the separation of the spectacle is quite another. The first involves
 the invention of new intellectual adventures, the second a new form
 of allocating bodies to their rightful place, which, in the event, is their place of communion.[^15]

Rejecting the self-imposed necessity of theatre to literalize the
‘community’ of spectators occupying the theater at any one time,
Rancière argues that, to the contrary,

>In a theatre, in front of a performance, just as in a museum, school or street, there are only ever individuals plotting their own paths in the forest of things, acts and signs that confront or surround them.[^16]

Art, he argues, need not and should not strive to create a collectivity
of its spectators. Art that attempts this fails to recognize the
capacity that has always already joined people across boundaries,
namely, the ‘shared power of the equality of intelligence’ which ‘makes
them exchange their intellectual adventures, in so far as it keeps them
separate from one another, equally capable of using the power everyone
has to plot her own path.’[^17] It is easy to see the potential overlaps
between the community creating desires of avant-gardism which neglect
the singularity of the viewer’s experience and thought, and the desire
of the New Labour government to create a stakeholder society, a series
of communities in which a place and activity is allocated to each and
every one, but which takes no soul into account.

I think Anthony Gormley’s public art exemplifies the stakes of this
institutional takeover of engagement and participation – we see its
machinations whirring around most nakedly in his 2009 work for Trafalgar
Square’s fourth column titled, *One and Other*. This piece entailed the
rotation of a volunteer living occupant of the plinth on an hourly
basis; an occupation which was filmed and archived on its associated
website. In a grotesque bureaucratic aping of avant-garde notions of the
audience’s co-production of the work, the volunteer needed to obtain the
right to participate by applying, via a website, and having their
intended action vetted in advance before being given a time slot. The
performances, by and large, became a theater of civil society
initiatives, exaggerated presentations of identity and narcissistic
exhibitionism. This work, it seems to me, operates according to the
Agambanian logic of ‘inclusive exclusion’, a logic that uses the very
act of inclusion as a means to exclude subjects from the scene of the
political or the aesthetic. The artwork becomes a microcosm of the
inclusive exclusion of the democratic process itself; participants, like
voters, are fairly and evenly, if impersonally and bureaucratically
treated, given a voice within the narrowly constructed terms of a
permissible utterance and, in so doing, denied the ability to be heard,
act collectively or engage in any ‘act’ that might rupture the normal
functioning of things. They are effectively engaged in order to be
neutralized, in the interests of the self-perpetuation of the state or
the state-like power of Gormley’s signature branding of high-profile
public space.

This stake of institutionalized engagement – its logic of inclusive
exclusion – is often discussed by artists who have worked within the
context of regeneration as a tactic of ‘soft policing’ performed on
those populations who will be most dramatically affected by development.
Alberto Duman has described the consultative work of public artists in
regeneration or ‘social conflict zones’ as that of appeasement. He says,
‘The artist, very often is called in with a fairly backward idea that
art has the capacity to negotiate, be a meeting place, art is a space
where differences are negotiated because it can transcend the specifics
of the situation, of time and space.’[^18] And yet, he is keen to point
out, this negotiating capacity of art is wielded from one side, namely
by those who are driving the process of regeneration. As with the Big
Society, public engagement is solicited just at the moment when the
conditions which nurture and sustain community are being dismantled,
through the generalized enclosures and sell-offs of public assets, the
privatization and shrinkage of public services and the ‘social
cleansing’ of non-productive life from the inner city. Far from ‘saving
lives’, socially-oriented artworks such as Gormley’s often provide the
image of what Boris Groys has called the regime of ‘aesthetic equal
rights’ as a cover for the reduction of the working class population’s
rights of access to the means of subsistence.

With a sharp sense of this double-sided, or as he calls it ‘two-faced’,
character of much participatory public art, Duman submitted a highly
sarcastic proposal to the Spitalfields Sculpture Prize in 2009. The
sculpture was intended to be sited in the conflict zone of a relatively
new corporate plaza that had been laid over the now demolished site of
one half of Spitalfields Market in East London. The prize is funded by
Hammerson, the developers behind the commercial development of the area
over the last 15 years. Playing a ‘two-faced’ game himself, Duman
submitted plans for a giant, 10m high ‘Cleaning in Progress’ sign that
would be both eye-catching, amusing and provide shelter for shoppers and
amblers from the elements. Of course the sting in the tail of this
apparently innocuous object was that the cleaning it makes reference to
is both social and literal; it commemorates those who have been purged
from the area in order to make way for the high real estate and rental
values it can now command, and flags up the relegation of those working
class occupants who remain to the ancillary role of cleaners and service
workers; the ghosts who maintain the space but for whom it isn’t
intended. The giant sign acts in solidarity with these ghosts who haunt
and preserve the spaces of pleasure and consumption, whilst allowing the
new occupants to shelter under its protective mantle.

For Boris Groys, avant-garde art’s development of a regime of ‘equal
aesthetic rights’ hinges on the idea, linked to the blurring of art and
life, that the classical avant-garde ‘has struggled to achieve
recognition of all signs, forms, and things as legitimate objects of
artistic desire and, hence, also as legitimate objects of representation
in art.’[^19] He sees a parallel between the aesthetic struggle for
recognition, and the political struggle for the recognition and
inclusion of all minorities. Within art, however, the thought that
anything can potentially be recognized as art potentially leads to an
entropic game where each artwork appears to be simply an arbitrary and
unnecessary extension or iteration of this field of equal rights.
However, he argues, art today ‘operates in the gap between the formal
equality of all art forms and their factual inequality.’[^20] So, while
recognizing the potential legitimacy of anything as art, in reality not
everything is considered as such and admitted into the museum or the
canon. ‘The good artwork’, he continues, ‘is precisely that work which
affirms the formal equality of all images under the conditions of their
factual inequality. This gesture is always contextual and historically
specific, but it also has paradigmatic importance as a model for further
repetition of the gesture.’[^21] I think Duman’s work strikes just such
a balance, elevating the readymade plastic sign to a higher power which
implies the potential elevation of any profane object, whilst mobilizing
this banal object to signify the factual exclusion of former inhabitants
who become the ‘revenants’ of this apparent space of open, democratic
enjoyment. Put another way, the participation of the banal object in the
aesthetic regime of equal rights becomes a cipher for the factual
impossibility of participation within a wider regime of participatory
aesthetics.

Earlier I mentioned that ‘openness’ was another regulatory idea that
intersects governmental, economic and aesthetic terrains. As with the
regime of equal aesthetic rights, the principle of openness can also
happily co-exist with and co-produce factual inequalities and closed or
proprietary systems. We see this everywhere from the deployment of the
open standards of the web, such as HTML and HTTP to run proprietary
software or for private profit, to the double standards of free market
capitalism where developing countries are compelled to open up their
markets and allow inward investment while economic giants like the US
are able to maintain trade barriers and subsidies for domestic
production. Openness itself is a kind of conceptual medium along which,
as chairman for the US Business Committee for the Arts in the 80s Winton
Blount once said, business can also travel. Fighting trade regulations,
taxation and overt government control was not just a civic duty, he
argued, but a means of keeping ‘open those avenues of freedom along
which art and commerce both travel.’[^22]

Roman Vasseur, Lead Artist appointed to oversee the redevelopment of
Harlow New Town, has argued, this reversibility of openness can also
extend to who might be considered an artist in the context of
creative-led regeneration. ‘One can envisage a future’ he says, ‘where
artists, or individuals with an extensive training in the visual arts
and art history will be slowly moved out of this new economy in favor of
“creatives” able to privilege deliverability and consultation over other
concerns.’[^23] It is worth considering how the energies that drive the
privileging of openness as an aesthetic, technical, economic and social
form waver between the political horizon of inclusion and the degraded,
flattening equivalence of the value form. This has the interesting
effect of driving the Beuysian claim that ‘everyone is an artist’ in at
least two directions at once: the death of the author also presides over
the birth of the professionalized creative. What this final example
reveals is the extent to which governmental and economic calculation and
the social engineering of happiness can move along similar trajectories
as the life-oriented activities of art. But in keeping with Groys’
remarks about the good artwork, the artistic attempt to promote a life
which is ‘more than just lived’ cannot take place under the monocultural
regime of human capital, or under the logic of biopolitical happiness,
if it does not draw attention to the way biopolitical capitalism
mobilizes individuals to create optimum effects within its own paradigm
of population optimization. The good artwork that aims to act upon life
takes into account the more radical horizons of openness, event, act,
milieu, engagement and participation, admitting as much to the factual
absence of these realities as to the potential for their potential in a
wholly unspecified future form.

### Reference List

Agamben, Giorgio. *Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life*, Palo
Alto: Stanford University Press, 1998.

Foucault, Michel. *Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the
Collège de France 1977-1978*, New York: Picador / Palgrave Macmillan,
2007.

Groys, Boris. *Art Power*, Cambridge, Massachussetts: MIT Press, 2008.

Kwon, Miwon. *One Place After Another: Site Specific Art and Locational
Identity*, Cambridge, Massachussetts: MIT Press, 2004.

Muhle, Maria. '“Qu-est-ce Que la Biopolitique”' A Conversation on
Theories of Biopolitics between Thomas Lemke and Maria Muhle, moderated
by André Rottman”, *Texte Zur Kunst*, 73 (March 2009).

Rancière, Jacques. *The Emancipated Spectator*, London: Verso, 2011.

Slater, Josephine Berry and Anthony Iles. *No Room to Move: Radical Art
and the Regenerate City*, Berlin: Mute Books, 2010.

Tafari, Levi. *Liverpool Experience*, \[Germany\]: Michael Schwinn,
1989.

Wu, Chin-Tao. 'Embracing the Enterprise Culture’, *New Left Review* 230
(1998).

[^1]: Michel Foucault, *Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the
    Collège de France 1977-1978*, New York: Picador / Palgrave
    Macmillan: 2007, p. 14.

[^2]: Foucault, *Security, Territory, Population*, p. 20.

[^3]: Foucault, *Security, Territory, Population*, p. 20.

[^4]: Foucault, *Security, Territory, Population*, p. 21.

[^5]: Foucault, *Security, Territory, Population*, p. 346.

[^6]: For a longer development of these arguments and history see,
    Josephine Berry Slater and Anthony Iles, *No Room to Move: Radical
    Art and the Regenerate City*, Berlin: Mute Books, 2010

[^7]: Levi Tafari, *Liverpool Experience*, \[Germany\]: Michael Schwinn,
    1989.

[^8]: Cf. Giorgio Agamben, *Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life*,
    Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 1998.

[^9]: Foucault, *Security, Territory, Population*, pp. 261-262.

[^10]: Foucault, *Security, Territory, Population*, p. 327.

[^11]: Foucault, *Security, Territory, Population*, p. 327.

[^12]: Maria Muhle in ‘“Qu-est-ce Que la Biopolitique?”: A Conversation
    on Theories of Biopolitics between Thomas Lemke and Maria Muhle,
    moderated by André Rottman’, *Texte Zur Kunst*, 73 (March, 2009), p.
    136.

[^13]: Cf. ‘Interview with Alberto Duman’, in Slater and Iles, *No Room
    to Move*, pp.58-79.

[^14]: Jane Jacob, cited in Miwon Kwon, *One Place After Another: Site
    Specific Art and Locational Identity*, Cambridge, Massachussetts:
    MIT Press, 2004, p. 111.

[^15]: Jacques Rancière, *The Emancipated Spectator*, London: Verso,
    2011, p. 15.

[^16]: Rancière, *The Emancipated Spectator*, p. 15.

[^17]: Rancière, *The Emancipated Spectator*, p.17.

[^18]: Alberto Duman, in Slater and Iles, *No Room to Move*.

[^19]: Boris Groys, ‘Equal Aesthetic Rights’, in *Art Power*, Cambridge,
    Massachussetts: 2008, p. 14.

[^20]: Groys, *Art Power*, p. 16.

[^21]: Groys, *Art Power*, p. 16.

[^22]: Cited in Chin-Tao Wu, 'Embracing the Enterprise Culture’, *New
    Left Review* 230 (1998): 30.

[^23]: Roman Vasseur in ‘Interview with Roman Vasseur’, in Slater and
    Iles, *No Room to Move*, p. 114.
