# The Creative Factory: Collective Creativity and Autonomy in the Neoliberal Machine of Creative Industries
### Sandi Abram

## Introduction: Genteel Capital Courtship 

A maxim constantly repeated by the Ljubljana Mayor in the last few years
has been ‘Ljubljana – the most beautiful city in the world’. The
sentence condenses the dominant urbanistic managerial ideology of the
Municipality of Ljubljana (hereafter MOL): the ideology of consumerist
attractiveness. The grandiose urban plans following this directive are
transforming the city into a postcard in order to send it and sell it,
especially to the urban tourism industry which clings to the public
image-making as well as to other formations of capital. The
straightjacketing of the public space into lucrative, sterile, and
disciplinary logic is not anything new. Yet some strategies of the
neoliberal urbanism in city espoused with the reproduction of capital
seem to be the new ones. Whereas the cultural consumption was fuelling
the city’s symbolic economy[^1] for quite a while, the cities in the
21<sup>st</sup> century strain themselves to become areas of peculiar multifaceted
production closely intertwined with consumption once again. This time
they are shaping a pervasive marketing coalition between the cultural
and art establishments, real estate speculators, service business, and
city councils.

The contemporary urban tourism industry ceases to have the privileged
sole position of the producer of surplus value in the metropolis.
Instead, the neoliberal capital colonization is invading new spheres and
ways of surplus extraction, while mimicking the ideological processes of
gentrification under ‘new planetary vulgates,’[^2] such as the
territorial ‘creative milieu’[^3]or the metropolitan ‘creative
city,’[^4] The proponents of such ‘new urban economy’[^5] tend to
blindly follow Florida’s nostrum of the new paradigm for urban planning
that can be found his all-encompassing predicament: ‘Human creativity is
the ultimate source of economic growth.’[^6] The territorial intertwines
with the cognitive colonization only to become a situated ‘creative
economy’ in the era of cognitive capitalism.

We can witness the entire trajectory of these processes through the case
of a former bicycle factory in Ljubljana. Located in immediate vicinity
of the city centre, the Rog factory operated until 1991, then remained
closed and abandoned until 2006,[^7] when, after 15 long years of
stagnation, the group TEMP, along with a conglomerate of other praxes
and realities,[^8] reclaimed the factory for temporary use and brought
the Fordist Frankenstein back to life. From 2010 onwards, the
reappropriation of the commons was claimed. Ever since their liberation
and reanimation, the spaces in Rog² present an open cultural, social,
and political hub giving shelter to a multitude of autonomous collective
political subjects[^9] as well as to a broad range of artists and sports
enthusiasts practicing horizontal organization and communication on a
daily basis.

In order to demonstrate how the paradigmatic shift to postfordist
cognitive capitalism is taking place and form in Ljubljana, I divided
the article into three sections. It starts by introducing the project
based on a public-private partnership bearing the name Second Chance,
then highlighting its initial intentions with the autonomous Rog and the
neoliberal discourse while advocating creative industries, urban
regeneration etc. After problematizing the premises of the ‘new urban
economy’ and of the designed emplacement of cognitive capitalism, the
article focuses on pilot project RogLab which is seen as a pervasive
creation of creative industries installed in the interim phase between
the unveiling of the megalomaniac plans and their implementation by the
owner of the factory, MOL. The third and concluding instance deals with
the changed spatial design, showing the proposed publically financed
gradual construction, or rather demolition, of the liberated Rog factory
which has, in fact, the purpose of neutralization and eradication of the
autonomous collective creativity in Rog, giving space to gentrification.

## The Public-Private Partnership Model as a Pan-European Paradigm of Gentrification: Second Chance

Starting with the year 2010, MOL’s endeavour to castrate Rog was wrapped
inside a benevolent cellophane, launched under the name the Second
Chance. The former Rog factory joined other postindustrial sites
including the former AEG factory (Nuremberg), HALLE 14 of the former
Cotton Spinning Mill (Leipzig), the tram depot (Krakow) and the Arsenale
(Venice). In order to understand the vulgar slogan of Second Chance
‘from industrial use to creative impulse’ we shall dwell directly on the
project’s description:

> \[The slogan\] \[i\]t is a vision of five European cities to transform
> a disused industrial site into a cultural and creative work and living
> space and continuing their revitalization with sustainable concepts.
> \[…\] Nuremberg, Leipzig, Venice, Krakow and Ljubljana work
> together[^10] to develop innovative strategies and concepts to upgrade
> their former industrial site to a key cultural linchpin of the city’s
> district. The cities face the same challenges of developing a heritage
> and former industrial sites. Even though the revitalization process is
> at different stages in the five cities, the partners share the same
> questions, challenges, opportunities and goals. \[…\][^11]

According to the initial plan, and through the private-public
partnership model, the buildings would be levelled first to the ground,
and then, once the ruins were cleaned up, the Centre of Contemporary
Arts was to be planned on top. To complement this grotesque picture, the
entire Rog’s surface (around 7,000 square meter) was to be split into
private (80.69%) and public (19.31%) ownership, whereby the private
‘content’ would comprise a residential (apartments, underground
garages), hotel and business section, while the public part were to be
exclusively reserved for *creative industries* (multi-purpose halls,
exhibition surfaces, studios etc.).[^12] The logic behind the two
bedfellows under neoliberalism is that the public would finance the
private and the private would parasite on public benefits. The
ideological premises nesting in the plan were in the apparent
satisfaction of both sectors: the private sector with profit-making
spaces and pseudopublic spaces as non-profit contents were to be
designed for the public.

However, the unveiled case of the expropriation of the commons is far
from being satisfactory. It is necessary to scale the whole problem on
the level of new urban regime which does not necessarily cling any
longer on the art world, as it symptomatically proposes to erect the
Centre of Contemporary Arts as well as spaces for arts and culture to be
featured inside. To expand a Hannah Arendt’s thought into the milieu of
‘creative capitalism’, the privatization of the public *and* the commons
is intimately connected to the privatization of the political. And to
put it differently, gentrification through art was complemented with the
gentrification through ‘creativity’. The culturalization of capital
under a new panacea for post-industrial sites means: creative
‘revitalization through arts and culture’.[^13]

Generally speaking, gentrification can manifest in three forms:
traditional, modern, and artificial.[^14] The traditional one is
produced by exploiting historical and social ‘guardians of collective
symbolic and cultural capital (the museums, the universities, the class
of benefactors, and the state apparatus)’.[^15] The modern one is
produced by exploiting the art world and urban subcultures as the
artificial gentrification is a strategy generated by city councils
through public campaigns which promote the creative city in order to
attract investments and highly skilled workers.[^16] Concomitantly, the
‘\[q\]uality of urban life has become a commodity, as has the city
itself, in a world where consumerism, tourism, cultural and
knowledge-based industries have become major aspects of the urban
political economy’.[^17]

What remains overshadowed is the mode of accumulation of the *collective
symbolic capital*. This capital, after Slovenia’s transition to
neoliberalism, was not exploited due to MOL’s active negation of the
autonomous cultural production in Rog today. In this sense, neither
squatters nor artists or other users of the postindustrial Rog had the
role of ‘bridge gentrifiers’[^18], i.e. transitional tenants, who would
be tolerated only until they raised property value. For example, in
Lower East Side (New York City) ‘\[t\]he artists were pioneers of
gentrification in this new frontier for the middle class, by creating an
art scene and community, combining the use of their space for living,
producing, performing and exhibiting.’[^19]

Instead of what Zukin[^20] termed ‘artistic mode of production’, the
parasitism through which the Second Chance has been building upon its
campaign, is availing to the emplaced and sediment collective symbolic
capital. It also accumulated during the socialistic industrial era and
strongly underlined the embedded collective memory. The ‘unique cultural
assets’[^21] of the former Rog industrial complex are in fact just
‘\[...\] special marks of distinction that attach to some place, as they
have a significant drawing power upon the flows of capital more
generally.’[^22] Concisely, claims to the uniqueness yield monopoly
rent.[^23]

I shall underline here another passage from the project’s description:
‘The cities face the same challenges of *developing a heritage and
landmarked former industrial sites*’.[^24] The claim indicates that the
accumulation of the *collective symbolic capital* would combine a
symbolic musealization of the localized ‘unique’ socialist remains
*with* the outlined cultural capital (the projected art spaces and
institutions) *in order to*, lastly, pave the way for capital
accumulation under the banner of creative industries. Thus, the
traditional way of gentrification will intertwine the (pseudo)modern and
the artificial form.

One of the premises of the pan-European Second Chance is therefore
purely teleological: the cognitariat would superimpose the bygone
proletariat which once laboured in these spaces spanning from
shipbuilders to bicycle factory workers. What is a better way to
illuminate the triumph of the bright ‘progressive’ capitalism over the
obscure ‘archaic’ socialism? Here also could fit the statement of the
MOL’s Head of Department for Culture expressed at the unveiling of the
new plans (which will be discussed in more detail later). According to
her, Rog will become a point of interest for the new generation of young
architects and designers, which will ‘get in the city centre a space and
tools for entering the labor market’.[^25]

Moreover, by perpetually referring to the *disused* and *(former) Rog
factory* the Second Chance is not only imaginarily discarding the
emplaced collective body from the past of a Yugoslav industrial
flagship, but rather the recuperation is broadened onto the semantic
level with a metonymy, castling the factory’s original denomination
(i.e. Rog) and by continuously repeating the Rog’s (distorted)
condition. The capitalist exploitation coated itself in ‘creativity’
abandoning the division between former/present, as the case of Rog
shows. The denial of this binarity is necessary, or else the legitimacy
of subjectivities present within Rog would be acknowledged.

In this view, an left-out part of the Second Chance description is to be
understood: ‘\[These postindustrial sites are\] the industrial estates
who deserve this 2nd chance.’[^26] The positioning of the Second Chance
in the linear continuation of the paternalistic logic of urbanism (the
anthropomorphized discourse of giving estates a second opportunity)[^27]
is actively denying the collective reappropiation of the space in 2006
as well as it is denying the ongoing manifold autonomous cultural,
social, and political production being housed in the buildings.[^28]
This attempt to revive a space already revived[^29] can signal only one
thing: creative industries will lie on the ashes of autonomous
collective creativity. One could go that far to delineate the latter as
a fetishist urban necrophilia: the compulsive reuse of the moribund
object-factory as a stimulus of capital consolation (or better yet,
accumulation). It is an object to which either any of the current
vivacity is apathetically negated, either to which the emancipating
collective creativity will be institutionally euthanatized by turning it
into an urban corpse – or only to be repossessed later. Once the
collective creative capital failed to undergo capitalist valorization,
the only attraction left to the capital and managerial establishment is
to cling to the cadaveric proletarian collective ‘body’.

Pointed out by Pasquinelli, Harvey’s *collective symbolic capital* can
be conceived as another name for the ‘*capitalist exploitation of the
commons* – a form of exploitation that does not need violent
enclosures’.[^30] Here the notion of violence deserves further
attention. Ever since Rog’s reappropriation, MOL is intentionally
leaving Rog in deficient circumstances, without the minimal material
conditions; ever since the reappropriation the whole complex is
functioning in abstraction of electricity.[^31] Rog’s users are
quotidianly experiencing systematic exhaustion, longitudinal vegetation
on their bodies, and, generally, the menace of eviction – all instances
of subtle structural violence strongly calling into question the
presumed no-violence-policy of capital exploitation.

Now I can focus on the postulation regarding the *exploitation of the
commons.* We are faced with the notion of the exploited commons, which
is easily applicable to the enunciated capitalistic mode of production
as immaterial, pertaining to cognitive, affective labour. This appears
be the position after the implementation of Second Chance, turning Rog
from a closedown factory into an immaterial social factory. Again,
according to the description the project’s intention is: ‘\[...\] to
transform a disused industrial site in a *cultural and creative* *work
and living space* \[...\]’.[^32] The phrase quintessentially comprises
the concept of bio-political production, in which all spheres of social
life are produced: ‘\[...\] post-Fordism and the immaterial paradigm of
production adopt performativity, communication, and collaboration as
central characteristics’.[^33] Perhaps this is an opportune time to
fasten more particularly the pervasive creation of the creative
industries.

## In the White Cube, a Simulacrum of the Creative Industries: RogLab Centre Pilot Project

The capital’s colonization of the public spaces and the commons once was
exemplified in 2012 with the so called RogLab Centre Pilot Project.
Installed as a plot investment of the Second Chance project and located
on the embankment directly across the street from Rog, RogLab takes a
shape of an entirely white cargo container. Here we have a double
interpretation of an object pioneering the local creative industries,
offering itself. The white container cannot be seen only as the advocate
of the White Cube and thus flagging the penetration of the new
‘creative’ urban economy; the container is simultaneously a prime
example of a boxed up neoliberalism through which the mantra of free
movements of goods, capital, services and people, is transmitted around
the globe. By analogy with Giddens’ the conceptualization of the state
as a territorial (bordered) power-container, RogLab strains in
presenting itself as an unconfined ‘creative’ power container and a
dynamo for the creative economy:

> RogLab is conceived as a production, educational and presentation
> space in a 30 m²‑container object. It is dedicated to activities in
> the fields of architecture, design and contemporary art, their mutual
> connecting and cross-sector collaboration (economy, education,
> science, environment, space…) as well as international
> networking.[^34]

RogLab’s spatial separation from the Rog building by being *outside* yet
*in face of* it, does not mean its contents are hermetically
encapsulated or, at first glance, antithetic to those nourished in
Rog.[^35] Quite to the contrary: this act of colonization of the public
space means as well the colonization of creativity by being the
epistemological and material forerunner of the creative industries in
the area. For example, RogLab is openly acknowledging the devastation of
Rog; it promotes to be ‘an attractive mobile architecture \[...\]
marking the beginning of the renovation of the former Rog factory. The
pilot project will function as a small scale model of the future Rog
Centre’.[^36]

Further, on the external surface of RogLab an imprinted characterization
reads: ‘In the 3D workshop for fast prototyping, we help you *develop
ideas into tangible products*’[^37] Thus, the neoliberal capitalist
paradigm of productive knowledge is canalized into an applicable and
vendible market form. ‘Neoliberalism,’ asserts Harvey[^38] ‘\[…\]
proposes that human well-being can best be advanced by liberating
individual entrepreneurial freedoms and skills within an institutional
framework characterized by strong private property rights, free markets,
and free trade. The role of the state is to create and preserve an
institutional framework appropriate to such practices.’

Taken together, Rog*Lab* can indeed be viewed as *labor-*atorial, a
laboratorial materialization reflecting the intertwined processes of the
capitalist rent parasiting on the productive commons,[^39] incorporation
of existent subversion, commodification of autonomous collective
creativity, and the (forerunner and justifier of) spatial
usurpation.[^40] The paradigmatic workshop/art project ‘Socialdress’
carried out in RogLab might be the utmost illustration of these
processes *in vitro*. Championing the creative industries, the workshop
sucked out the labour of unemployed women who were voluntarily
embroidering clothes for several days:

> This art project \[…\] takes place in the form of a clothes and
> household fabrics fashion collection. The collection incorporates
> slogans from the recent Slovenian protests[^41] – the expression of
> the general public’s rebellion and dissatisfaction with the existing
> system. Modern embroidery machines will be used to embroider the
> selected slogans onto fabrics and clothes, thus empowering them.
> Traditional craft skills, modern technology, fashion, social
> engagement, activism and social entrepreneurship all join forces in
> this new interdisciplinary art project \[...\].[^42]

The machine of commodification, which mimics under the coat of
benevolence and social responsibility, attempted to decontextualize and
castrate the collective subversive potentiality of the uprisings by
aestheticization and banalization, vampirizing the free labour: ‘The
\[Socialdress\] project promotes and supports sewing e.g. dress
home-making. It transforms the sewing into an entertaining and useful
social activity’.[^43] Here, the unpaid social cooperation, the mutual
production, and interdisciplinary collaboration all go a step further
from the individualism inherent to the anatomized precariat. The
neoliberal machine does not base its agenda anymore on explicit
exclusion, but rather on the controlled inclusion – preferably the
collective one. In this vein, it is necessary to mention the emphasis of
the Second Chance on the newly incarnated neoliberal species, who do not
go under the name stockholders or shareholders but stakeholders instead.
According to Marx’s general intellect or to Kropotkin’s mutual aid, a
neoliberal counterpart is allocated and linked with the fabrication of
consent through a Habermassian ideal communication and rational
discourse. Throughout the practice of the Second Chance, the
colonization of the commons goes hand in hand with the adoption of the
formalized ‘inclusive bottom-up participatory’ smokescreen.

## Gentrification Goes Public

What was to be witnessed in 2013 was another twist in the neoliberal
municipal urban policies. In the explication of the changed spatial plan
for Rog, under the heading ‘*Assessment of the situation, causes and
aims why the document is necessary*’ the scenario runs: since the
initial blueprint was approved, the situation, especially economic, has
been changing and the arrangement of Rog’s area to the extent of the
previous spatial plan was no longer possible. In reality, no private
investor was willing to take part in the Second Chance, thereby
decelerating the entire process of the execution; indeed, an irony
derived directly out of the global financial crisis. Neither the
downfall of a private-public partnership or the subsequent resignation
of capital did not bury the peculiar spatial voracity. Notwithstanding
the financial deficit and the public debt, the construction pretence is
now to be orchestrated by the municipality independently of the
investments from the private sector.

Therefore, a changed spatial plan was proposed enabling the construction
in several stages. More accurately, a seven-phased (re)construction is
now being designed. In the first stage of the construction, the
blueprint includes two crucial interventions: the ‘outside arrangement’
around the central building *and* an underground garage overlapping with
the position of almost all buildings on the territory of Rog.[^44] In
all likelihood, the planned besiegement of the central building and the
‘outside arrangement’ will manifest itself directly in the form of an
internal reconstruction of the main factory outbuilding, leaving behind
another ‘late capitalist hollow space’[^45]

As for the surrounding buildings without the historical
preservation,[^46] which itself allows façadism— and the demolishment of
the building’s interior yet leaving its exterior intact— these will be
levelled to the ground, causing another symptomatic fenced urban void,
filled at the best with gravelled parking spaces, as this profitable
emptiness is the *modus operandi* for architectural shortfalls in the
city. What would evidently distinguish it from other urban voids caused
by the lack of investments is contained in the intention of transforming
the building into a politically silent urban phantom. The eviction of
users, the fencing off potential occupants, and seclusion are all
practical strategies of de-politization. In other words, the complete
resignation from the project remains unimaginable since gentrification
operates in a broader urban context. With the restructuration into a
‘postindustrial creative site’ though, the refashioned Rog factory will,
at best, become the situated gravitational field for gentrification, as
the process of gentrification will inevitably include the entire
surrounding neighbourhood. (PHOTO)

## ‘Gentrification is class war’

The fundamental reason behind the repeatedly converted plans of
demolishment of the liberated Rog factory area seems simple;[^47]
communities ‘that swarm in Rog, are not dangerous for MOL because of the
revitalization of \[...\] abandoned spaces, but because of the swarming
of new and different forms of social activities, connections and
collaboration’.[^48] The eradication and neutralization, discursive or
violently material, of autonomous collective creativity, troubling the
flows of capital, are inevitably inherent to wider processes of capital
accumulation. For once, in the current condition, the extraction of
monopoly rent as the business model in cognitive capitalism (Pasquinelli
2010) is obstructed. In the hegemonic notion of the collective
creativity, we run into the creativity as ideological substitution for
labour. The creativity as understood by the apologist of corporative
creative industries has not become the Deleuzian becoming, but an
ideological superstructure of labour and therefore exploitation.

Beuys’ famous claim fulfils itself in an odd manner – in the age of
cognitive capitalism, elevating each and every individual into divinity,
everyone is not an artist, but a *creator*. Fortunately, the
repolitization of creativity and its emancipation from the neoliberal
colonial deadlock are being collectively produced in factories of the
Foucauldian insurrectional subjugated knowledge. The remaining question
is whether one will hop on the moving train rushing through the
urbanscape moved by these machines.

### Reference List

Anonymous. 1989. *The Occupation of art and gentrification*. Internet
source:
http://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-the-occupation-of-art-and-gentrification\#fn\_back7,
reviewed October 1, 2013.

Bloch, Ernst. ‘Building in Empty Spaces,’ in Bloch, Ernst: *The Utopian
Function of Art and Literature*. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press,
1959/1996, pp. 185-198.

Bourdieu, Pierre and Loïc Wacquant. ‘NewLiberalSpeak. Notes on the new
planetary vulgate.’ *Radical Philosophy* 105 (2001) pp. 1-5.

Florida, Richard. *Cities and the Creative Class*. London, New York:
Routledge, 2005.

Gregorčič, Marta. ‘Rog – presenečanja, iz katerih rojijo multitude.’
*Časopis za kritiko znanosti*, 34 -223 (2006) pp. 7-10.

Hardt, Michael and Antonio Negri. *Multitude: War and Democracy in the
Age of Empire*. New York: Penguin Press, 2004.

Harvey, David. 'The Art of Rent: Globalisation, Monopoly and the
Commodification of Culture ' (2001).
http://www.generation-online.org/c/fc\_rent1.htm

Harvey, David. *A Brief History of Neoliberalism*. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2005.

Harvey, David. ‘The Right to the City.’ *New Left Review*, 53 Sept. Oct
(2008): 23-40.

Institute for Civilisation and Culture. *SWOT Analysis for the Purposes
of the Revitalisation of the Former Rog Factory with the Establishment
of the Rog – Centre of Contemporary Arts*. (2011) Internet source:
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/SWOT\_Analysis\_Ljubljana.pdf

Jelesijević, Nenad. Rog med razlastitvijo in prilastitvijo skupnega.
Radio Študent (5 April 2012). Internet source:
http://radiostudent.si/kultura/dlako-z-jezika/rog-med-razlastitvijo-in-prilastitvijo-skupnega

Krajčinović, Nina. Rog kot politični projekt brez zagotovljenih
sredstev. *Delo* (5 September 2013)
http://www.delo.si/novice/ljubljana/rog-kot-politicni-projekt-brez-zagotovljenih-sredstev.html

Katrin Fischer et al. *Revitalisation through arts and culture: new
developments for 5 European industrial complexes.* Nürnberg: Second
Chance (2012)
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/SECOND-CHANCE\_Mid-Project-Brochure\_online\_final.pdf&gt;,
reviewed 1 October, 2013.

Kurnik, Andrej and Barbara Beznec. ‘Resident Alien: The Rog Experience
on the Margin,’ in Radical Education Collective (eds) *New public
spaces: dissensual political and artistic practices in the post-Yugoslav
context*. Maastricht: Jan van Eyck Academie, 2009, pp. 45-62.
http://radical.temp.si/reader/AndrejBarbara.pdf

Kurnik, Andrej. *Vzamimo si mesto!* (2013),
http://www.njetwork.org/Vzamimo-si-mesto

Landry, Charles. *The Creative City: A Toolkit for Urban Innovators*.
London: Earthscan, 2000.

Mihelič, Breda et al. *Les anciennes usines ‘Rog’/Ljubljana : exemple
Européen de mise en valeur du patrimoine architectural abandonné : actes
du 4ème Colloque Eurocultures, Ljubljana: 29 mai - 2 juin* (1995),
Brussels: Institut Supérieur d'Architecture Saint-Luc.

MOL. 2013. *Dopolnjeni osnutek Odloka o spremembah in dopolnitvah Odloka
o občinskem podrobnem prostorskem načrtu za del območja urejanja CI 5/6
Rog*, http://www.ljubljana.si/file/1351552/dop\_osn\_spr\_oppn\_ci56.pdf

Pasquinelli, Matteo. ‘Beyond the Ruins of the Creative City: Berlin’s
Factory of Culture and the Sabotage of Rent’, in KUNSTrePUBLIK (eds),
*Skulpturenpark Berlin\_Zentrum*. Berlin: Verlag der Buchhandlung
Walther König, 2010.

Pungerčar, Marija Mojca. ND, http://www.3via.org/index.php?htm=mojca

Rog Centre Pilot Project. *About*, (2013) http://www.roglab.si/en/about

Rog Centre Pilot Project. *Socialdress – Power to the People* (2013),
http://www.roglab.si/en/fresh/2013/socialdress\_empowering\_people

Sassen, Saskia. ‘Locating cities on global circuits.’ *Environment &
Urbanization* 14 (2002): 13-30.
http://www.rrojasdatabank.info/urban/euv14n1p13.pdf

Second Chance. *Project Description* (2013). Internet source:
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=26

Second Chance. The Former Rog Factory (2013) Internet source:
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=16

Second Chance. Rog Centre of Contemporary Arts (2013). Internet source:
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=94

Second Chance. Can Culture Alone Regenerate Places? (2012),
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?p=1112

TEMP. ‘TEMP about TEMP, or a quick and unsystematic retrospective of the
workings of one temporary and informal multidisciplinary group.’ In:
Radical Education Collective (eds.): *New public spaces: dissensual
political and artistic practices in the post-Yugoslav context*.
Maastricht: Jan van Eyck Academie (2009): 144-158,
http://radical.temp.si/reader/TEMP.pdf

The Institute for the Protection of Cultural Heritage of Slovenia
*STROKOVNE ZASNOVE VARSTVA KULTURNE DEDIŠČINE za območje MESTNE OBČINE
LJUBLJANA* (2008),
http://giskd2s.situla.org/evrdd/SZ/eVRD\_SZ\_Ljubljana\_2008\_02\_00.pdf

Vercellone, Carlo. *The New Articulation of Wages, Rent and Profit in
Cognitive Capitalism* (2008).,
http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/26/55/84/PDF/The\_new\_
articulation\_of\_wagesHall1.pdf

Zukin, Sharon. *Loft Living: Culture and Capital in Urban Change*,
Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.

Zukin, Sharon. *Landscapes of Power: From Detroit to Disney World*,
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.

Zukin, Sharon. *The Cultures of Cities*, Cambridge: Blackwell, 1995.

[^1]: Sharon Zukin, *Landscapes of Power: From Detroit to Disney World*.
    Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991. Sharon Zukin, *The
    Cultures of Cities*, Cambridge: Blackwell, 1995.

[^2]: Pierre Bourdieu and Loïc Wacquant, ‘NewLiberalSpeak. Notes on the
    new planetary vulgate’, *Radical Philosophy* 105 (2001): 1-5.

[^3]: Charles Landry, *The Creative City: A Toolkit for Urban
    Innovators*, London: Earthscan, 2000.

[^4]: Richard Florida, *Cities and the Creative Class*, London, New
    York: Routledge, 2005.

[^5]: Saskia Sassen, ‘Locating cities on global circuits,’ *Environment
    & Urbanization* 14 (2002): 22.
    http://www.rrojasdatabank.info/urban/euv14n1p13.pdf

[^6]: Richard Florida, *Cities and the Creative Class*, London, New
    York: Routledge, 2005, p. 22.

[^7]: For a more detailed history of Rog from the second part of the
    19th century onwards see Mihelič et al. (1995) or the historical
    digest available on Tovarna Rog website
    (http://tovarna.org/node/131); for a sociopolitical analysis see
    Kurnik and Beznec (2009); Kurnik (2013).

[^8]: Cf. TEMP. ‘TEMP about TEMP, or a quick and unsystematic
    retrospective of the workings of one temporary and informal
    multidisciplinary group.’ In: Radical Education Collective (eds.):
    *New public spaces: dissensual political and artistic practices in
    the post-Yugoslav context*, Maastricht: Jan van Eyck Academie
    (2009): 144-158. Internet source:
    http://radical.temp.si/reader/TEMP.pdf

[^9]: To name some*: Invisible Workers of the World, World for Everyone,
    Civil Initiative of the Erased Activists, Front of the Precarious,
    Iz-hod* (Walk-out) movement for the deinstitutionalization from
    total institutions, Occupy Movement \#15o, Anti-Capitalist Block
    etc.

[^10]: Together work, of course, the city managers and the appurtenant
    administration.

[^11]: Second Chance, *Project Description* (2013), pp. 4,
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=26

[^12]: Institute for Civilisation and Culture. *SWOT Analysis for the
    Purposes of the Revitalisation of the Former Rog Factory with the
    Establishment of the Rog – Centre of Contemporary Arts* (2011).
    Internet source:
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/SWOT\_Analysis\_Ljubljana.pdf

[^13]: See the homonymous brochure, Katrin Fischer et al.
    *Revitalisation through arts and culture: new developments for 5
    European industrial complexes.* Nürnberg: Second Chance (2012)
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/SECOND-CHANCE\_Mid-Project-Brochure\_online\_final.pdf&gt;,
    reviewed 1 October, 2013.

[^14]: Matteo Pasquinelli, ‘Beyond the Ruins of the Creative City:
    Berlin’s Factory of Culture and the Sabotage of Rent,’ KUNSTrePUBLIK
    (eds), *Skulpturenpark Berlin\_Zentrum*. Berlin: Verlag der
    Buchhandlung Walther König (2010)

[^15]: David Harvey, 'The Art of Rent: Globalisation, Monopoly and the
    Commodification of Culture' (2001).
    http://www.generation-online.org/c/fc\_rent1.htm

[^16]: Matteo Pasquinelli, ‘Beyond the Ruins of the Creative City:
    Berlin’s Factory of Culture and the Sabotage of Rent,’ KUNSTrePUBLIK
    (eds.): *Skulpturenpark Berlin\_Zentrum*. Berlin: Verlag der
    Buchhandlung Walther König (2010).

[^17]: David Harvey, ‘The Right to the City.’ *New Left Review* 53
    (September-October 2008): 31.

[^18]: Sharon Zukin, *The Cultures of Cities*, Cambridge: Blackwell,
    1995, p. 111.

[^19]: Anonymous. *The Occupation of art and gentrification* (1989)
    pp.7.
    http://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-the-occupation-of-art-and-gentrification\#fn\_back7

[^20]: Sharon Zukin, *Loft Living: Culture and Capital in Urban Change*,
    Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.

[^21]: The phrase is taken from the announcement of the public
    presentation carried out by Lia Ghilardi in the City Museum at MOL's
    invitation (see Second Chance 2012).

[^22]: David Harvey, 'The Art of Rent: Globalisation, Monopoly and the
    Commodification of Culture' (2001).
    http://www.generation-online.org/c/fc\_rent1.htm

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: Second Chance, *Project Description* (2013) Emphasis mine.
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=26.

[^25]: Demšič in Krajčinović. Nina Krajčinović, 'Rog kot politični
    projekt brez zagotovljenih sredstev', *Delo* 5^th^ September 2013,
    http://www.delo.si/novice/ljubljana/rog-kot-politicni-projekt-brez-zagotovljenih-sredstev.html

[^26]: Second Chance, *Project Description* (2013).
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=26.

[^27]: A topic deserving its own Foucauldian analysis is not just the
    inflation of euphemisms for gentrification but also the medical,
    anthropomorphized, and biopolitical urbanistic discourses (e.g.
    revitalisation, regeneration, reanimation, rehabilitation,
    sustainable, degraded, sanitation).

[^28]: Initially the entire multitude in Rog was nonchalantly ignored
    from any description whatsoever. However, the current and updated
    version of the project’s website is recognizing the contemporary
    murmurings in the Rog’s building – altogether in one sentence:
    “Since 2006 the building is being used on a daily basis by temporary
    users who developed cultural, artistic, sport and social activities
    on site” (Second Chance 2013).

[^29]: Nenad Jelesijević, Rog med razlastitvijo in prilastitvijo
    skupnega. Radio Študent (5 April 2012).
    http://radiostudent.si/kultura/dlako-z-jezika/rog-med-razlastitvijo-in-prilastitvijo-skupnega

[^30]: Matteo Pasquinelli, ‘Beyond the Ruins of the Creative City:
    Berlin’s Factory of Culture and the Sabotage of Rent,’ KUNSTrePUBLIK
    (eds): *Skulpturenpark Berlin\_Zentrum*. Berlin: Verlag der
    Buchhandlung Walther König (2010)

[^31]: This situation is somewhat being compensated by relying on the
    usage of electricity generators that require an increasingly larger
    amount of money for each organized event.

[^32]: Second Chance, *Project Description* (2013). Emphasis mine.
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=26

[^33]: Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, *Multitude: War and Democracy in
    the Age of Empire*, New York: Penguin Press, 2004, p. 200.

[^34]: Rog Centre Pilot Project, *About* (2013)
    http://www.roglab.si/en/about

[^35]: This separation is also an uncanny physical evidence of not
    accepting the present situation of the living self-organized
    communities in Rog.

[^36]: Second Chance, Rog Centre of Contemporary Arts (2013),
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=94

[^37]: Ibid. Emphasis mine.

[^38]: David Harvey, *A Brief History of Neoliberalism*, Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2005, p.2.

[^39]: Carlo Vercellone, *The New Articulation of Wages, Rent and Profit
    in Cognitive Capitalism* (2008).
    http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/26/55/84/PDF/The\_new\_
    articulation\_of\_wagesHall1.pdf

[^40]: Such intents were already detectable during the proposal to erect
    the Centre of Contemporary Arts.

[^41]: To give few examples of protest slogans coined by the popular
    anger to be later embroidered: **“***gotof si*” (you are finished!),
    “*fertik je*” (it’s over), “*vse jih bomo nesli vun*” (we’ll take
    them all out), “*ulice so naše*” (the streets are ours), “*lopovi!*”
    (crooks!), “*moč ljudem, ne strankam*” (power to the people, not to
    parties).

[^42]: Rog Centre Pilot Project. *Socialdress – Power to the People*
    (2013),
    http://www.roglab.si/en/fresh/2013/socialdress\_empowering\_people

[^43]: Marija Mojca Pungerčar, ND (2013),
    http://www.3via.org/index.php?htm=mojca

[^44]: MOL 2013.

[^45]: Ernst Bloch, ‘Building in Empty Spaces’, in Bloch, Ernst: *The
    Utopian Function of Art and Literature* Cambridge, Massachusetts:
    MIT Press (1959/1996): 185-198.

[^46]: The urbanistic taxidermy sparing the main factory outbuilding
    will be performed because it falls under the cultural heritage
    protection (cf. The Institute for the Protection of Cultural
    Heritage of Slovenia 2008, 45).

[^47]: The urban plans of MOL can be, to some extent, seen as the tactic
    response to the claims during the temporal occupation: the problem
    of empty premises, the lack of a clear strategy with Rog, the need
    of spaces for sociocultural production etc.

[^48]: Marta Gregorčič, ‘Rog – presenečanja, iz katerih rojijo
    multitude.’ *Časopis za kritiko znanosti*, 34 / 223 (2006): 7-10.
