---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


*Introduction*

## THE GRAY ZONES OF CREATIVITY AND CAPITAL

The initial idea that led to the preparation of this publication was not
a reflection of the editors’ wish to merely add another publication
focusing on a critique of the relationship between creative industries
and capital to the huge corpus of similar publications taking a critical
stance towards the process of co-optation of creativity, creative
industries, art or the domain of abstraction in general by capital. Even
though, precisely through the logic of the mass production of critical
texts dealing with the above-mentioned context, this publication as well
will ultimately exist in such a register, the distinctive feature of
this publication is its aspiration to place the relationship between
creativity and capital in the context of an analysis wherein capitalism
is treated as the framework of a broader relationship of domination,
which to a great degree goes beyond the currently popular critical niche
focused on analyzing the relationship between creativity, abstraction or
representation in general and capital.

The vast majority of such publications are characterized by such a
perception of the relationship between creativity and capital, which
implies that the co-optation and exploitation of work, creativity and
attention occurs in a post-class, post-ideological or post-colonial
context of the so-called “networked world or networked democracy”,
wherein all subjects and their actions are reportedly subjected to the
logic of capital in the same way. Regardless of whether we speak of the
ideological use of the concept of creativity in the name of
rationalization of the neoliberal strategies of transforming the city
into ghettoized class and racial apartheids, whether we speak of the
exploitation of attention (the economy of attention) by financial
capital or generally about the epistemological positioning of
creativity, abstraction or the domain of representation within the
dominant form of rationalization and reproduction of capitalism, this
publication strives to retain a critical view that sees these processes
as forms of the perpetuation of the hegemony of capitalism in the
so-called contemporary era.

As regards the temporal framework encompassed in this publication,
although certain texts, through the logic of the necessity of
historicization of specific strategies and practices refer to historical
periods preceding the 21st century, the majority of the texts contained
in this publication refer to social and political processes from the end
of the 20th and the beginning of the 21st century, that is, the current
period. In this sense, the dominant ideological discourses, strategies
and power relations of today constitute the focus of attention of the
topics of this publication.

This publication, then, occupies a position that treats “the networked
world”, its democracies, cognitivities, attention and culture as domains
wherein, or with help of which, forms of the reproduction of capitalism
as a heterogeneous form of hegemony, primarily of the First World of
capital or the West, are reorganized, “modernized”. The title “The Gray
Zones of Creativity and Capital” does not, therefore, point primarily to
instances of vagueness and dichotomy in the analysis of the social
meaning of the cooperation between creativity and capital, but assumes a
critical stance towards “gray areas” in those dominant interpretations
of capitalism that try to view it as a post-ideological, post-class or
post-bloc system.

In this sense, the introductory text by Santiago Castro-Gómez, entitled
“The Missing Chapter of Empire - Postmodern reorganization of
coloniality and post-Fordist capitalism”, critically addresses the
interpretation of contemporary capitalism (presented in the text
“Empire” by Antonio Negri and Michael Hardt) that views it as a system
of equal exploitation of all. Castro-Gomez sees the capitalism of today
as a modernized form of the colonial division of the world, in which the
First World of capital, the West, still retains a monopoly on defining
progress, and in which that same world retains a surplus of privileges
within the framework of the unbalanced distribution of global wealth.
Even though the majority of texts in this publication are not
decolonialist in character, we use Castro-Gomez’s text as a form of
positioning this publication in relation to the interpretation of
contemporary capitalism that we see as a modernized colonial power
structure of the First World of capital.

The text by Jonathan Beller entitled “Within the Image” analyses in a
similar manner, but from a different perspective, the socio-political
meaning and the ideological effects of the capitalist exploitation of
the image and attention. From a structuralist position, Beller analyses
the role which the commodification of the image, attention and
abstraction plays in the neoliberal free market and its ideologies, but
in those same contemporary forms of capitalism the author also detects a
specific colonial and racial relationship of domination.

Josephine Berry Slater’s text “Neutralizing Engaged Subjects in the
Creative City”, relying on Foucault’s theoretical apparatus, criticizes
the biopolitical and repressive character of the neoliberal strategies
of transforming urban Great Britain in the post-Thatcher era. Even
though Slater locates the roots of the neoliberal strategies of social
engineering and the laissez-faire concept of organizing society and the
economy in Thatcher’s attack on the role of society in the regulation of
society, the author links the roots of the derogation of subversive
social engagement with the contemporary forms of organization of
capitalism, in an alliance with the modern art mainstream.

Marc James Leger’s text “The Agency of Art in the Unconscious”
critically addresses contemporary art as a form of reproducing the
nullity of social significance contained in the domain of creativity in
capitalism. Relying to a large extent on the psychoanalytic theory of
Lacan and Žižek, Leger structurally links contemporary art and the
domain of creativity in general to modern political economy in the sense
in which he sees contemporary art as a form of neutralization of radical
fiction that would antagonize the above-mentioned relationship with
capitalist economy.

“The Art of New Class Geography of the City - Culture-guided urban
regeneration serving the modernization of the periphery” is a text by
Ana Vilenica wherein she critically addresses the practices and
principles contained in the neoliberal establishment of a class
geography of urban environments in Serbia. Vilenica’a text does not
remain at the level of analyzing the neoliberal strategies of
contemporary capitalism, but also deals with the broader meaning of
class and racial principles invested in the processes of modernization
in general. In this sense, Vilenica analyses the effects of an alliance
of sorts between capital and creative industries, emphasizing the role
of art and culture in contemporary capitalist ideological rhetorics.

Sandi Abram’s text “The Creative Factory: Collective Creativity and
Autonomy in the Neoliberal Machine of Creative Industries” analyses the
effects of postfordist cognitive capitalism on the social scene in
Ljubljana, Slovenia. Abram assumes a critical stance towards the
public-private partnership model invested in the processes of producing
a new class geography of urban environments, which is a model that Abram
sees as a part of a broader pan-European paradigm of gentrification.
Analyzing the transformation of the Rog factory in Ljubljana, Abram sees
the processes of gentrification as parts of a broader capitalist
strategy of turning the entire society into a factory and/or a specific
commodified niche in the hierarchies of capitalist exploitation.

The text by Irmgard Emmelheinz, entitled “Neoliberalism and the Autonomy
of Art: The Culture of Power, the Power of Culture” analyses the effects
of reconfiguring the social-political role of the figure of “Other” in
the context of Mexico and/or the broader region of Latin America.
Emmelheinz takes a critical position in relation to postmodern
democratic culture and the institutions of contemporary art than she
sees to be a part of the broader process of the utilization of culture
by capitalism. The author concludes that within the space of division of
political and aesthetic representation occurs a paradigmatic change in
the role of culture in neoliberal capitalism, whose autonomy no longer
points to its ability to produce a radical criticism of the system, but
precisely the opposite – to its total depoliticization.

First of all, the function of all these texts within the context of this
publication is to expand the critique of capitalism to include a
critique of all the normative practices contained in capitalism as a
hegemonic power structure, primarily of the First World of capital, and
then also of all the other actors involved in maintaining the
hierarchies of exploitation.

Since the region of the former Yugoslavia is still undergoing the
obscene process of the so-called transition to a free market economy,
dictated by the colonial centre in the West and carried out by a
politically impotent ethnocentric nation state, the role of this
publication is to contribute to the interpretation of these processes as
processes of a devastating derogation of the political role of the
state, the concept of political control of society and devastation of
society in general as a collective which transcends, that is, which
should transcend the centrality of ethnicity. This publication, then,
establishes a structural connection between the reportedly separated
concepts of modernization and the establishment of capitalist
hierarchies of exploitation.

In this sense, all those processes – such as the depoliticization of
culture, subjecting culture and art to the logic of the free market,
that is, separating the state from culture – which are presented in the
public discourse by the ruling elites and free market proponents as
strategies and ideological principles necessary for a transformation of
society, politics and the economy into functional modern societies – are
viewed in this publication as strategies and ideological principles
serving to establish capitalist modernity only. This publication, then,
positions itself radically against the imposition and legitimization of
such an ideological supernarrative wherein only the hierarchies of
exploitation, radical class and ethnic divisions and the impotence of
politics reduced to an administrative professional category will be
functional to the detriment of society which has yet to be politicized
and/or reinvented as a collective whose needs surpass the needs of the
free market and the specific actors who profit the most from its logics.

*Šefik Tatlić and Gordana Nikolić*

Santiago Castro-Gómez

## THE MISSING CHAPTER OF EMPIRE

*Postmodern reorganization of coloniality and post-Fordist
capitalism*[^1]

This paper starts with a sense of puzzlement about this question: Is
there only one world or are there various possible worlds? I want to
reformulate this question in the following way: is it possible to share
a single world where many worlds are possible? Or to put it yet another
way, is it possible to share a world where different ways of knowing
that world can coexist and complement each other? A world where
epistemological plurality can be recognized and valued? Unfortunately,
my answer to these questions would have to be a ‘provisional no’ because
to this day, at least for the last 500 years, it has not been possible
to recognize the epistemological plurality of the world. On the
contrary, a single way of knowing the world, the scientific-technical
rationality of the Occident, has been postulated as the only valid
episteme, that is to say the only episteme capable of generating real
knowledge about nature, the economy, society, morality and people’s
happiness. All other ways of knowing the world have been relegated to
the sphere of doxa, as if they were a part of modern science’s past, and
are even considered an ‘epistemological obstacle’ to attaining the
certainty of knowledge.

What made this possible? How was one form of rationality able to
establish itself as the only legitimate way of knowing the world? By
virtue of what kind of power were other ways of knowing expulsed from
the map of epistemes and downgraded to the underdeveloped character of
doxa? The ‘Coloniality of power’ is the category used by some social
scientists and philosophers of Latin America to describe the phenomenon
by which a rigid hierarchy between different knowledge systems exists in
the world. This hierarchization is not new: its roots are based in the
European colonial experience, and specifically in the idea that the
colonizer possesses an ethnic and cognitive superiority over the
colonized. It is for this reason that our question about the coexistence
of diverse legitimate ways of producing knowledge should necessarily
involve an analysis of the coloniality of power in the contemporary
world. Our question would then be: Do we live in a word where the old
epistemological hierarchies made rigid by modern colonialism have
disappeared, or on the contrary, are we witnessing a postmodern
reorganization of coloniality?

In their famous book Empire, Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri (from here
forward H/N), offer a clear answer to this question. Their thesis is
that the modern/colonial hierarchies have disappeared, and that there
now exists a unique opportunity for the multitude to generate a
plurality of possible worlds in opposition to the single world of
Empire. However my thesis would be that Empire is only a postmodern
renewal of the rigid epistemological hierarchies that existed under
modernity, making it difficult to think of a radical democracy of the
multitude as H/N propose. To defend this thesis I will present the
following: first I will briefly outline the arguments that H/N offer to
support the death of colonialism in the contemporary world. I will then
give a critical analysis of their arguments, showing what problems are
manifested in the genealogy of Empire by H/N. Finally, I will come to a
case study that serves as an example of what constitutes the postmodern
reorganization of coloniality in Empire.


### The era of empire

The general thesis of H/N is that both imperialism and colonialism have
reached their end because they are both specifically modern devices of
the exploitation of human labor, and today capital does not need these
historical forms to reproduce itself. On the contrary, imperialism and
colonialism, which were very useful to the expansion of capital for more
than 400 years, actually became an obstacle for global capitalism. For
this reason these forms were overtaken by the dynamics of the world
market itself (Hardt & Negri 2001, p. 323).

Firstly, H/N associate colonialism directly with the formation of
European nation-states in the seventeenth century. In the seventeenth
century, the intellectual elites and politicians of Europe found
themselves in a kind of civil war because the ‘humanist revolution’ of
the sixteenth century[^2] that established the ‘plane of immanence’, was
threatened by the ‘illustrious counterrevolution’. The intention of this
counterrevolution was to exercise control over the constitutive desires
of the ‘multitude’ (that is to say the early commercial bourgeoisie of
Europe) and to establish rational standards in all areas of society.
Finally, what the Enlightenment proposed was to legitimate, by way of
science, the establishment of disciplinary apparatuses that permitted
the normalization of bodies and minds to orient them towards productive
work. But it is precisely in the enlightened project of normalization
where colonialism fits so well. Constructing the profile of the ‘normal’
subject that capitalism needed (white, male, owner, worker,
heterosexual, etc.) necessarily required the image of an ‘other’ located
in the exteriority of European space. The identity of the bourgeois
subject in the seventeenth century is constructed in opposition to the
images of ‘savages’ who lived in America, Africa and Asia that
chroniclers and travelers had circulated throughout Europe. Therefore
present-day values of ‘civilization’ are affirmed in contrast to the
barbaric past in which all that are ‘outside’ live. The history of
humanity is seen then as the uncontestable progress towards a mode of
capitalist civilization in which Europe is the standard imposed on all
the remaining forms of life on the planet. The transcendent apparatus of
the Enlightenment constructs a unified European identity that requires
the figure of the ‘colonial Other’ (Hardt & Negri 2001, p. 149).

Now in the nineteenth century, once the Fordist mode of production had
consolidated its hegemony, colonialism continued to play an important
role in the reproduction of capital, thanks to the struggle that arose
between the different industrial empires of Europe. In this phase,
colonialism is subordinated to the formation of European industrial
society and the need to conquer outside markets as a source of
resources. Here H/N yield to the way classical Marxist theory drew the
limits of the concept of Imperialism. The ‘era of imperialism’,
according to authors like Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg and Eric Hobsbawm, took
place between 1880 and 1914, that is in the moment in which the larger
part of the planet was under the political or commercial domination of
the industrialized powers of Europe: the United Kingdom, France,
Germany, Italy and the Netherlands. These countries competed fiercely
for control of ‘zones of influence’ that could accelerate the process of
industrialization, a competition that would culminate in the First World
War. From this perspective, colonialism appears as a subproduct of the
development of industrial capitalism in certain European nation-states.
This situation persisted until well into the twentieth century, until
the first two decades of the Cold War, when the larger part of the
colonized countries declared their independence from Europe, in the
moment when capitalism started to make the move from a Fordist economy
to a post-Fordist mode of production.

H/N’s thesis is that with the advent of postfordism, world capitalism
enters into the last and definitive stage of its history: Empire. In the
new phase, the type of production that now dominates the world economy
is not that of commodities like in industrial society, but that of
symbols and abstract language (Hardt & Negri 2001, pp. 286-297). It is
not the manufacturing of physical objects but the manipulation of data
images and symbols that characterizes the post-Fordist economy. This
hegemony of immaterial work requires that production stop being tied to
specific territories and that the factory is no longer the paradigmatic
center of work. Globalization not only transplanted production outside
the physical walls of the factory, radically transforming the relation
between capital and work, it also converted colonialism into a historic
relic of humanity. In the moment in which knowledge becomes the
principal productive force of global capital, replacing the physical
labor of slaves and the manual work of the factory, colonialism stops
being necessary for the reproduction of capital.

In effect, colonialism was a historical formation that grew in a context
where you could still talk about an ‘inside’ and an ‘outside’ of
capital. In its expansive logic, capital needed to conquer markets, not
capitalists, and that explains the processes of European colonization
(Hardt & Negri 1000, pp. 228-233). But when the Empire had filled all
social spaces with its logic, when production was no longer tied to
specific territories, when the time of the ‘open borders’ of capital had
ended, there is no longer an ‘outside’ where the categories of
‘colonialism’ and ‘imperialism’ can be applied.[^3] The argument that
capitalism has reached its end relies also on the thesis that the modern
sovereignty of the nation state has declined and ceded to the postmodern
sovereignty of Empire. If colonialism was a creation of the sovereignty
of nation-states in Europe, then the decline of that sovereignty would
necessarily mean the end of colonialism. The sovereignty that we are now
living is not modern, but postmodern. Colonialism, as a functional
element of the project of modernity, is a thing of the past. The
colonial representations of the ‘other’ that affirmed European identity
are no longer necessary, because Europe is no longer the ‘center’ of the
world-system. In fact, Empire does not need to have more centers.
According to H/N, ‘our postmodern Empire doesn’t have a Rome’ (p. 310),
that is to say that now we do not divide the world hierarchically into
centers, peripheries and semi-peripheries, as Wallerstein would have
wanted it. Without centers, without peripheries and without an outside,
Empire doesn’t need the representations of the ‘other’ to affirm its
identity, because Empire doesn’t have an identity. Empire is smooth and
spectral: it is found everywhere, without being located anywhere at that
same time. For this reason, affirm H/N, the ‘dialectic of colonialism’
has stopped being functional today.[^4]

For H/N, the territorial dichotomies of center and periphery are
obsolete, because in Empire it is no longer possible to demarcate large
geographical zones as privileged sites of production. There certainly
exists an ‘uneven development’, but the lines of division and hierarchy
are now not found along national boarders (p. 324). There is also
poverty and misery rooted in the large cities of Europe and the United
States, the Third World inside the first, while in the countries of the
‘South’, like in India and Brazil, there exist post-Fordist elites that
live better than those of the ‘North’. Today, North and South are global
spaces that no longer define an ‘international order’. The principal
economic actors of capitalist postmodernism are not nation-states but
multinational corporations that do not operate on the basis of settling
in specific territories. Uneven development is not territorial, since
‘all the levels of production can exist simultaneously and together \[in
the same territory\], from the highest levels of technology,
productivity and accumulation, to the lowest’ (p. 324).

To summarize: For H/N, the new hierarchy of global power is no longer
understandable if we continue to think from the field opened and made
visible by the concept of Imperialism, where the only truly geopolitical
actors are the nation-states that operate according to a
center/periphery logic. Today, the structure of the postmodern world
system does not operate primarily on the basis of inter-state relations
and the struggle between metropolitan States for hegemonic control over
the peripheries. Empire is not English, French, Arab or American, but
simply capitalist. This explains the reordering of the old geopolitical
divisions based on territories (North and South, center and periphery)
in function of the new global hierarchy of power, and also explains why
colonialism is a phenomenon of the past. In Empire, old inequalities and
colonial segmentations between the countries have not disappeared, but
have acquired another form. There are inequalities now that do not have
an imperialist form because both imperialism and colonialism become
obstacles for the expansion of capital (Hardt & Negri 2001, p. 323).

### The darker side of the force

I want to propose a critique of H/N that salvages some elements of their
theory of postmodern capitalism, but which also points to the
deficiencies in their analysis of colonialism. Formulated in positive
terms, my thesis will be that the concept of Empire allows a critical
analysis of global capitalism that supplements, and in some cases
replaces, analyses using the concept of imperialism. The numerous
critics of the book are correct in that there continue to be imperial
rules and actors that are the same as those conceived under the concept
of imperialism. However, there are other rules and other global actors
becoming hegemonic in the post-Fordist economy that the concept of
imperialism fails to grasp. It is here where the concept of Empire
reveals its importance. Formulated in negative terms, my thesis will be
that the genealogy of Empire, as it is reconstructed by H/N, makes the
understanding of the typically modern phenomena that persist in Empire
difficult, such as occidentalism, epistemological hierarchies and
racism. From my point of view, the genealogy of Empire proposed by H/N
is incomplete and should be complemented with what in this work I call
the ‘missing chapter of Empire’.

I want to begin by alluding to an article published by Walter Mignolo in
the year 2002 titled ‘Colonialismo global, capitalismo and hegemonía
epistémica.' In this text, Mignolo affirms that the concept of Empire
elaborated by H/N only shows one side of globalization, its postmodern
side, completely ignoring its darker side (Mignolo 2002, p. 227). What
is the ‘darker side’ of postmodernism? For a number of years, Mignolo
has worked on the subject of colonial representations in modern
occidental thinking. In his book, The Darker Side of the Renaissance,
Mignolo appeals to the classic gesture of modern critical theory: it is
not possible to understand the humanism of the Renaissance if we ignore
its historical aprioris, that is to say its historical conditions of
possibility. In the pen of Wallerstein, Mignolo says that the capitalist
economy-world that arose in the sixteenth century constitutes the global
scene in which the humanistic thought of the Renaissance developed. But
this economy-world comes marked from the beginning with what the
sociologist Aníbal Quijano calls a ‘structural heterogeneity’. The
economic and political domination of the economy-world by Europe is
sustained by colonial exploitation and is not conceivable without it.
That is to say, the grand works of humanism of the Renaissance cannot be
considered only ‘spiritual’ phenomena, independent of the
modern/colonial world-system in which they materialized. The ‘gold of
the Indies’ made the great flow of riches from America to the European
Mediterranean possible, a situation that generated the conditions for
the ‘humanistic revolution’ of the sixteenth century to flourish.
Therefore, the ‘structural heterogeneity’ that Mignolo and Quijano talk
about is based on the premise that the modern and the colonial are
simultaneous phenomena in time and space. Thinking of the Renaissance as
a European phenomenon, separated from the modern/colonial economy-world
that sustains it, is equivalent to generating an incomplete and
mystified image of modernity.

But this is precisely what started to occur in the eighteenth century.
Mignolo affirms that Enlightenment (Aufklärung) thinking generates what
the Argentinean philosopher Enrique Dussel calls ‘the eurocentric myth
of modernity’. This myth consists of the elimination of the structural
heterogeneity of modernity, in the name of a lineal process in which
Europe appears as a privileged place of enunciation and generation of
knowledge. The traditional and the modern stop coexisting and now appear
as successive phenomena in time. Coloniality is not seen as a
constitutive phenomenon but rather as a derivative of modernity. This
would be an exclusively European phenomenon originating in the Middle
Ages, and that later spread around the world through Intra-European
experiences like the Italian Renaissance, the Reformation, the
Enlightenment and the French Revolution. In this way, the myth of
eurocentrism identifies European particularity with universality
tout-court, and identifies coloniality with the Europeanpast. The
coexistence of diverse ways of producing and transmitting knowledge is
eliminated because now all forms of human knowledge are ordered on an
epistemological scale from the traditional to the modern, from barbarism
to civilization, from the community to the individual, from the orient
to the occident. Mignolo points out that this colonial strategy of
producing silences and absences belongs to the ‘dark(er) side’ of
modernity. By way of this strategy, scientific thought positions itself
as the only valid form of producing knowledge, and Europe acquires an
epistemological hegemony over all the other cultures of the world
(Castro-Gómez 2005).

Now we can return to the question, why do H/N show only the postmodern
side of Empire, without consideration of its ‘dark(er) side’? Mignolo’s
answer is consistent with his previous work. As coloniality is the
‘other face’ constitutive of modernity, postcoloniality is the
structural counterpart of post-modernity. But H/N only talk about the
‘postmodern’ face of Empire, ignoring its postcolonial manifestation. In
this way, the structural heterogeneity is newly eliminated, privileging
an Eurocentric vision of Empire:

Empire is postmodern in the sense that modernity is transformed along
with the transformation of coloniality. This step is not given by Hardt
and Negri because to them postcoloniality is a phenomenon that is
derivative (and not constitutive) of postmodernity. Their argument leads
to the conclusion that for them, postcoloniality means overcoming or the
end of coloniality. They do not think or suggest that postcoloniality is
the hidden side of postmodernity (as coloniality is the hidden side of
modernity), and in this sense, what postcoloniality means is not the end
of coloniality but its reorganization. Therefore the postcolonial would
be the new and up-to-date forms of coloniality that correspond to the
postmodern stage of Occidental history. (Mignolo 2002, p. 228)[^5]

Mignolo’s argument- correct in my judgment - is that H/N outline a
genealogy of Empire that does not take into account the structural
heterogeneity of modernity. To them, modernity is a European phenomenon
that later ‘extends’ to the rest of the world in the form of
colonialism. In this way, for example, the authors begin the genealogy
of Empire saying that everything begins in Europe, between the year 1200
and 1600 (Hardt & Negri 2001, p. 104).[^6] Here it is clearly shown that
for H/N, modernity gestates completely inside Europe and develops
successively by way of Intra- European phenomena like the Renaissance,
the Enlightenment and the creation of the modern State, the industrial
revolution, etc., until modernity reaches its postmodern crisis in
Empire. What happens in the rest of the world, outside of Europe, only
interests H/N in that they consider the expansion of the sovereignty of
the modern State outside of European borders.[^7] Their point of
reference, therefore is Europe and not the world-system, and is the
reason why they see the ‘humanistic revolution’ only from its modern
side, without recognizing its ‘colonial face’. What Mignolo calls ‘the
dark side of the Renaissance’ continues to be invisible to them.

But what would happen if the genealogy of Empire took the economic world
as its point of reference rather than the thinking and action of a few
renowned men and European cultural movements? Mignolo points out what
would occur: it would be impossible to disregard the structural
heterogeneity of the economic world. If the genealogy of Empire began
with the rise of the world economy in the sixteenth century, then not
only would we have a precise date of birth (12 October 1492) but also a
specific scheme of functioning: the mutual dependence of coloniality and
modernity. H/N however cannot take this step because it would seriously
compromise their thesis that the ‘humanistic revolution’ of the XV and
sixteenth centuries in Europe was a constituent social phenomenon. On
the contrary, the thesis of Mignolo, Quijano and Dussel is that the
humanism of the Renaissance was, first and foremost, a world phenomenon
(and not European) because it unfolded inside the world-system, and
second because it was a constituted process because its ‘line of escape’
was established in opposition to the theological culture of the European
Middle Ages but not against capitalism. No revolutionary ‘plane of
inmance’ was established in the sixteenth century as H/N propose, but
the substitution of a plane of local transcendence for a plane of world
transcendence.

The silencing of this ‘dark side of the Renaissance’ in the genealogy of
Empire has grave analytical consequences. The first, outlined by Mignolo
is that coloniality is considered a phenomenon derived from the
sovereignty of the modern nation-state. And this interpretation leads to
another that is even more problematic: once the sovereignty of the
modern nation-state is put in crisis by globalization and the
post-fordist economy, colonialism ceased to exist. Empire will mean the
‘end’ of colonialism because the devices of normalization and
representation associated with the modern State are no longer necessary
for the reproduction of capital. On the contrary, if one takes the
economy world of the sixteenth century as a point of reference to
outline the genealogy of Empire, then you can no longer affirm that
coloniality is a derivation of State, but a phenomenon constitutive of
modernity as such. And this interpretation leads to another, which is
the interpretation I will defend in the next section: Empire will not
bring the end of coloniality but its postmodern reorganization. This
imperialistic reorganization of coloniality is the other side (invisible
to H/N) that Empire needs for its consolidation.

In summary, we can therefore say that the creators of the concept Empire
have a eurocentric vision of the concept that fails to recognize its
colonial devices.[^8] The ‘missing chapter of Empire’ would have to
elaborate a non-eurocentric genealogy to allow a critique of the new
(postmodern) forms of coloniality. In the following, I will try to trace
an outline of what such a critique might look like. Using the same
concept of Empire created by H/N, I will show how coloniality does not
disappear in postmodern capitalism, but is reorganized in a postcolonial
way.

### The (post)coloniality of power

The question I want to answer in this final part is the following: what
happens in the moment in which immaterial production -no longer the
material production associated with industrialization - is placed at the
center of the politics of development?

I want to show how the concept of Empire proposed by H/N is useful in
specifying exactly what the change produced in the concept of
development consists of. But this diagnostic should be complimented with
what in this work I call ‘the missing chapter of Empire’. The diagnostic
that H/N offer is incomplete because they do not take into account one
of the fundamental aspects of imperialistic power, recognizing its
‘postcolonial face’. In effect, of all the structural changes that the
authors analyze with great insight in their book (modern to postmodern
sovereignty, imperialism to Empire, the Fordist to the post-Fordist
economy, the disciplinary society to the society of control, etc.) there
is one that stands out by its very absence: the change from coloniality
to postcoloniality. I want to show what this change consists of, taking
as an example the new global agendas of sustainable development.

During the sixties and the seventies, the nation-states, supported by
studies in the social sciences and especially economics defined
development of Third World countries in reference to the indicators of
industrialization. It was assumed that development depended on the
promotion of industry, in such a way that underdevelopment necessarily
corresponded to a pre-industrial stage of history. Overcoming
underdevelopment was equated with promoting the take off of the
industrial sector. It was believed that promoting industry would result
in an increase in per capita income and improvement in the indices of
literacy, education, life expectancy, etc. To the developmentalists, the
call for promoting the transition from ‘traditional’ society to ‘modern’
society because they assumed that modernization, is a rehearsal of the
old colonial idea according to which underdevelopment was an inferior
phase to full development. Development and underdevelopment are two
Western ideas. Thus, promoting modernization became the central
objective of the Asian, African and Latin American States during these
decades. In this context, state intervention was made urgent in key
sectors like health, education, family planning, urbanization and rural
development. All of this was part of a strategy designed by the state to
create industrial enclaves that permitted a gradual elimination poverty
and ‘to bring development’ to all sectors of society. The underdeveloped
populations of the Third World were seen in this way as an object of
planning and the agent of this biopolitical planning should be the
state. The function of the state was to eliminate obstacles to
development, that is to say eradicate, or in the best of cases
discipline, all those whose profiles of subjectivity, cultural
traditions and ways of knowing would not adjust to the imperatives of
industrialization.

However, the Colombian anthropologist Arturo Escobar has shown that
beginning in the 1980s, the idea of industrial development weakened and
was replaced by another idea: sustainable development. According to
Escobar,

It seems the idea of development is loosing part of its strength. Its
incapacity to carry out its promises, together with resistance from many
social movements and many communities is weakening its powerful image;
the authors of critical studies try to give form to this social and
epistemological weakening of development by way of their analyses. You
could argue that if \[industrial\] development is losing its push, it is
because it is no longer indispensable to the globalization strategies of
capital. (Escobar 1999, p. 128)[^9]

According to Escobar, capital is undergoing a significant change in its
form and is gradually acquiring a postmodern face (Escobar 2004, p.
382). This means that certain aspects once considered residual variables
of modern developmentalism (like the biodiversity of the planet, the
conservation of the environment, and the importance of non-occidental
systems of knowing) now become central elements of the global politics
of development. For Escobar, ‘sustainable development’ is nothing more
than the postmodern restructuring of modern development. This means that
economic development is no longer measured by the material levels of
industrialization, but in terms of the capacity of a society to generate
and preserve human capital. While the development theories of the
sixties and seventies only took into account the ‘physical capital’
(industrialized products) and the exploitation of ‘natural capital’
(primary resources), sustainable development places the generation of
‘human capital’ at the center of its concerns, that is to say the
promotion of the knowledge, aptitudes and experiences that convert a
social actor into an economically productive subject.[^10] In this way,
the possibility of converting human knowledge into a productive force,
replacing physical work and machines, becomes the key ingredient of
sustainable development.[^11]

H/N’s reflections also point in this direction. For them, hegemonic
production is no longer centered on material work, that is to say
hegemonic production is no longer based in the industrial sector and its
disciplinary apparatuses. The hegemonic strength of work today does not
comprise material workers but agents capable of producing and
administering knowledge and information. In other words, the new type of
work with strength in global capitalism is defined by its ‘capacity to
manipulate symbols’. This not only means that computers and new
information technologies form an integral part of the labor activities
of millions of people the world over, and that familiarity with these
technologies of communication is a fundamental requisite for access to
employment. It also means that the model for the processing of symbols
characteristic of communication technologies is becoming the hegemonic
model for the production of capital. According to this model, the
capitalist economy is being reorganized today based on the knowledge
that sciences like molecular biology, genetic engineering, and
immunology produce, as well as the knowledge that types of research like
the human genome, artificial intelligence and biotechnology produce. For
H/N and Escobar, postmodern capitalism is a biopolitical regime in the
sense that it constructs both nature and bodies through a series of
biopractices where it turns out knowledge is fundamental.[^12]

Sustainable development is a good example of the way in which the
capitalist economy is reorganized in a postmodern way. If we start from
the assumption that information and knowledge are the basis of the new
global economy (and no longer the industrial production controlled by
the State), then the lack of access to those resources becomes the key
factor in explaining underdevelopment. It is not in vain that Chapter 40
of Agenda 21 signed in Rio de Janeiro within the framework of the United
Nations Conference on Environment and Development (1992),[^13]
establishes that ‘in sustainable development, each person is at once a
user and a carrier of information’. This means that the State is no
longer the principle agent of the changes that drive economic
development. The agents are now the social actors themselves, by way of
their appropriation of the cognitive resources that would allow the
promotion of an economy centered in information and knowledge. To be
sustainable, economic growth should be capable of generating ‘human
capital’, which means improving knowledge, expertise and the ability to
manage social actors in order to use them more efficiently. The theorem
of sustainable development can thus be formulated in the following way:
without the generation of ‘human capital’, it will not be possible to
overcome poverty because of the increasing knowledge gap between some
countries and others. According to this theorem, a country could develop
only when it learns to utilize and protect its intellectual assets
because such assets are now the driving forces in an economy based on
knowledge.

The centrality of knowledge in the global economy and in imperialistic
politics of development is made more evident when we examine the subject
of the environment. Beginning with the Conference in Rio already
mentioned, the environment becomes the backbone of sustainable
development. It was at the conference where this Conference that The
Agreement on Biological Diversity was signed, obligating signatory
nations to protect their genetic resources given that now genetic
resources were considered part of the ‘common heritage of mankind’. The
United Nations’ interest in the conservation and management if this
‘heritage’ is clear: genetic resources have economic value and mean
benefits for those businesses that work with the latest technologies in
the areas of biotechnology and genetic engineering. In this way, the
handling of information and abstract languages —what H/N call
‘immaterial production’ —is placed at the center of the capitalist,
postmodern business.

In effect, the identification, alteration and transference of genetic
material by way of knowledge have economic applications in the fields of
agriculture and health. In the agricultural sector, biotechnology works
by incrementing the production of food by means of the production of
transgenic plants that are most resistant to plagues and insects, and
less vulnerable to chemical fumigation. In 1999, 90 percent of the soya
beans produced in Argentina and 33 percent of the corn produced in the
United States originate from transgenic crops, and that percentage is
even higher for products like cotton, tomatoes, tobacco, sugar cane,
asparagus, strawberries, papaya, kiwi, barley, cucumber and zucchini.
The biotechnological transformation of agriculture is a profitable
business for the food industry and is controlled by a handful of
businesses specialized in biotechnical research. The same occurs in the
health sector. The pharmaceutical industry is concentrated in the
production of medicines with a biological basis that are used in the
treatment of illnesses like cancer, hemophilia, and hepatitis B, not to
mention the growing production of generic medication and pharmaceutical
drugs. It is estimated that the market for medication derived from plant
extracts or biological products generates profits that hover around four
hundred thousand million dollars annually, earnings that are
concentrated in the hands of a small number of multinational businesses
that monopolize ground-breaking research.[^14]

Therefore, the subject of biodiversity places us at the forefront of a
strategic sector of the global economy that will certainly redefine the
geopolitics of the twenty-first century because access to genetic
information will determine the difference between success and economic
failure. Multinational corporations are interested in genetic resources
that can be altered and manipulated by expert knowledge. Interestingly
enough the greatest diversity is found in countries located in the
South, the underdeveloped countries. For this reason, these businesses
have initiated a real ‘lobbying’ campaign to obtain patents for these
resources, appealing to intellectual property rights (CDI). Before the
Uruguayan round of the GATT[^15] in 1993, no transnational legislation
existed that pertained to intellectual property rights. Multinational
businesses like Bristol Myers, DuPont, Johnson & Johnson, Merck and
Pfizer, with vested interests in the biodiversity business, pressured
for the introduction of the TRIP[^16] accord into the negotiations. This
agreement permits the monopolistic control of the planet’s genetic
resources by businesses.

Intellectual Property is a juridical concept with a transnational scope.
It is protected by the United Nations through the OMPI (World
Intellectual Property Organization), which protects and regulates the
‘creations and innovations of the human intellect’, such as artistic and
scientific works.[^17] According to this norm, when immaterial products
involve some type of technological innovation that has commercial
application, they can be patented by their authors and used as if they
were private property.[^18] A patent is defined as the concession that
the State grants to an inventor so he can commercially exploit his
product in an exclusive way, for a certain amount of time. In the case
of biodiversity and genetic resources, multinational corporations that
work with the latest technologies can legitimately claim that any
genetic alteration of the flora and fauna implies an inventive activity
of the intellect that has a direct application in the agricultural or
pharmaceutical industries, and therefore they are rightfully protected
by patents. By claiming that genetically modified biological material is
no longer a product of nature but of human intellect, the multinationals
claim the right to patent and declare as their own the economic benefits
from the commercialization of these products. Legitimated in this way by
a supranational juridical regime, the intellectual assets administered
by multinational corporations are converted into the key sector for the
creation of wealth in postmodern capitalism.

But it is precisely here where the ‘postcolonial face’ of Empire is
revealed. I am talking about the ways in which new representations of
development reinforce the modern/colonial hierarchies in a postmodern
register, establishing a difference between the valid knowledge of some,
and the non-knowledge or doxa of the others. One example of this is the
way in which global agendas of sustainable development approach the
subject of ‘traditional knowledge’. Multinational corporations are aware
that by association with biodiversity and genetic resources, traditional
knowledge and its ‘officials’ acquire a fabulous economic potential and
represent numerous opportunities for commercialization. It is no wonder
that in 2001 the OMPI created a ‘intergovernmental committee for the
protection of intellectual property, genetic resources, traditional
knowledge and folklore’, and that in 2003 UNESCO declared that
‘...communities, in particular indigenous communities, play an important
role in the production, safeguarding, maintenance and recreation of the
intangible cultural heritage, thus helping to enrich cultural diversity
and human creativity’.[^19] The ‘safeguarding’ of traditional knowledge,
now transformed into the ‘guarantors of sustainable development’, does
not come for free. What is sought is to put a whole series of knowledges
used for hundreds of years, by hundreds of communities world-wide at the
disposal of multinationals specialized in research on genetic resources.
These knowledges become susceptible to appropriation by multinational
corporations through patents. Naturally, this requires a change in the
representations of the other. What does this change consist of?

We know that in the modern paradigm of development, non-occidental
systems were seen as the enemies of progress. It was assumed that
industrialization created the conditions to leave behind a type of
knowledge based in myths and superstitions, replacing it with the
technical-scientific knowledge of modernity. It was also believed that
personal traits like passivity, lack of discipline and indolence,
associated perhaps to defects of race, depended rather on the ‘absence
of modernity’. The absence of modernity could be overcome in the same
way that the State resolves structural problems like illiteracy and
poverty. In this way, the modern paradigm of development was also a
colonial paradigm. ‘Other’ knowledges had to be disciplined or excluded.

However, and as H/N see it, postmodern capitalism is presented as a
machine of segmentary inclusions, not of exclusions. Non-occidental
knowledge is welcomed by the global agendas of Empire because it is
useful to the capitalist project of biodiversity. The tolerance of
cultural diversity has become a ‘politically correct’ value in Empire,
but only in the sense that diversity is useful for the reproduction of
capital. The indigenous person, for example, is no longer seen as
someone pertaining to the social, economic and cognitive past of
humanity, but as the ‘guardian of biodiversity’ (Ulloa, 2004). Once
considered obstacles to a nation’s economic development, the indigenous
are now seen as indispensable to the sustainable development of the
world. Traditional knowledge is elevated to the category of ‘the
intangible heritage of humanity’. Arturo Escobar formulates it in this
way:

Once the semiotic conquest of nature is complete, the sustainable and
rational use of the environment becomes imperative. Here is found the
underlying logic of the discourses of sustainable development and
biodiversity. This new capitalization of nature not only rests on the
semiotic conquest of territories (in terms of biodiversity reserves) and
communities (as the ‘guardians’ of nature); it also requires the
semiotic conquest of local knowledges, in the sense that ‘saving nature’
requires the valuation of local wisdom about the sustainability of
nature. Modern biology begins to discover that local systems of
knowledge are useful complements. (Escobar 2004, pp. 383-384)

The point that we want to emphasize is that the ‘semiotic conquest’
mentioned by Escobar re-signifies the colonial and modern mechanisms
that legitimated the exclusion of ‘other’ knowledges in a postmodern
form. It is in this sense that we talk about the postcolonial face of
postmodernity. The ‘recognition’ that is given to non-occidental systems
of knowledge is pragmatic rather than epistemical. Although the wisdom
of indigenous communities or black communities can now be seen as
‘useful’ for the conservation of the environment, the categorical
distinction between ‘traditional knowledge’ and ‘science’, elaborated in
the Enlightenment of the eighteenth century, is still in force. The
former continues to be seen as anecdotal knowledge, not quantitative and
lacking methodology, while the later continues, in spite of the
transdisciplinary efforts of the last decades, to be taken as the only
epistemically valid knowledge. Not a single document of global entities
like UNESCO questions this assumption. On the contrary, the document of
the OMPI titled Intellectual Property and Traditional Knowledge
establishes that traditional knowledge is tied to ‘folkloric
expressions’ such as songs, narratives and graphic designs, reproducing
the classic distinction between doxa and episteme. In no part of the
document is a dialogue between occidental science and local wisdom
proposed. No dialogue between a biologist trained at Harvard and a
shaman from Putumayo is possible, only what amounts to a ‘transfer’ of
knowledge in one direction. In this way, all that is sought is to
document the doxa and preserve it (according to what is established by
the Agreement on Biological Diversity signed in 1992) so that it can
later be patented.[^20]

The praxis of multinational corporations is a clear example of how we
have not reached the ‘end of colonialism’ as H/N declare, but that
colonialism reformulates itself in a postmodern way. Firstly, research
in genetic engineering is very expensive. For that reason, a small
number of companies from the richest countries in the world dominate the
field, while their ‘object of study’, the biological wealth of the
earth, is concentrated the poor nations of the subtropical and tropical
regions of the world. It is estimated that more than 4/5 of the
biological diversity of the planet is found in regions that used to be
called ‘Third World’. Colombia, surpassed only by Brazil, is the second
most biodiverse country in the world. More species of amphibians,
mammals and birds exist there than in any other nation. For the above
reasons, supranational entities like the OMPI and regional treaties like
the TLC are intended to eliminate national-level protections of
biodiversity and open the door to big pharmaceutical and agribusiness
corporations so they can move forward with research and, patent the
genetic resources contained in natural products. All this of course is
with the help of local communities according to those who look to seduce
local communities with the promise of a share in the earnings from the
sale of traditional knowledge. For this however, a patent is required
that would allow those companies to control the knowledge and resources
generated by this faboulous business. Indeed, 95 percent of the
biological patents are controlled by five big biotechnical companies,
and the earnings produced by the issuing of patents was fifteen thousand
million dollars in 1990.

The patents are the juridical mechanism by which new forms of colonial
expropriation of knowledge are legitimated. Vandana Shiva mentions the
case of a bioprospecting contract between a conservationist institute
from Costa Rica and the pharmaceutical multinational Merck in 1991.
Merck, with earnings of four thousand million dollars a year and close
to three thousand share-holders from all over the world, paid the
ridiculously low sum of one million dollars to Costa Rica for the
exclusive right to investigate, collect samples and catalogue the
genetic resources in a number of Costa Rica’s national parks. This was
done without consulting or soliciting the opinion of the indigenous
communities that live in that region, and without guaranteeing them any
sort of benefit. According to Shiva, the market for the medicinal plants
discovered and patented by Merck, but facilitated by the indigenous
communities and locals, is estimated today at some 43 thousand million
dollars. Something similar occurs with the Free Trade Agreement (Tratado
de Libre Comercio), which requires that countries rich in biodiversity
like those of the Andean region provide legal guarantees for the
implementation of ‘biological corridors’ where multinationals can
appropriate genes and the ancestral knowledge of the population. In this
way, and in signing the Agreement as proposed by the United States, the
market for products derived from biodiversity and associated knowledge
would stay under the monopolistic control of a handful of companies.

Therefore, we have argued that postmodern capitalism, based in the
production of knowledge, has converted biodiversity into the new ‘green
gold’ of the Indies. H/N’s thesis that there is no ‘outside of Empire’
does not mean that all geographical territories have already been
colonized by the market economy, and that therefore the era of
colonialism has ended. It means, better yet, that capital now needs to
find posterritorial colonies to continue its process of expansion. These
new colonies, even if they continue to be seated in the old territories
of modern colonialism, they no longer reproduce the same logic of that
colonialism. Its logic is rather of a post-Fordist type, because it is
no longer material riches that they seek, but information contained in
the genes and in non-occidental systems of knowledge. It is for this
reason that they no longer look to destroy but to preserve traditional
wisdom, despite the fact they still see them as epistemically devalued
forms. Now the ‘value’ given to the work of local communities has no
material measure as in modern colonialism, but is measured in immaterial
terms. Their work and their culture have value as long as they serve to
produce ‘sustainable knowledge’. However, this knowledge is expropriated
by the new logic of Empire.

It is surprising then that H/N declare the death of colonialism so
assuredly, in spite of being aware of this problem. Consider for example
the following passage taken from the book Multitude:

The global North is genetically poor in plant varieties and yet it holds
the vast majority of the patents: while the global South is rich in
species, but poor in patents. What is more, many of the patents in the
power of the North are derived for the genetic primary material that is
found in the species of the South. The wealth of the North generates
benefits in the form of private property, while the wealth of the South
does not generate any wealth because it is considered the heritage of
all humanity. (Hardt & Negri 2004, pp. 216-217)

But instead of considering bioproperty as a form of postmodern
reorganization of coloniality, H/N prefer to engage with hegemony of
immaterial work. Nonetheless, the step from Fordist to post-Fordist
production that is emphasized by H/N does not only mean that immaterial
production obtains hegemony over material production. It means, above
all else, that we are entering a type of world economy that is no longer
based entirely on mineral resources, but increasingly in plant and
biological resources. Forty percent of all productive processes today
are based in biological materials and the tendency is growing. This
means that without the genetic resources located in the poor regions of
the South, and without the premeditated expropriation of non-occidental
systems of knowledge, the post-Fordist economy of Empire would not be
possible. For this reason we declare that the colonialism of power has
not died, but has only changed form. This does not mean that the
strictly modern forms of coloniality have disappeared, but that other
forms have appeared that share an affinity with the new imperatives of
immaterial production.

Returning then to the question that opened this work, is there only one
world, or are there various possible worlds? It would have to be said
that the conditions generated by Empire, the colonial hierarchies of
knowledge established by modernity, persist and make it difficult to
think of a world in which epistemic plurality is recognized and
appreciated. Capitalism is a machine that captures the proliferation of
possible worlds and expropriates the production of ‘other’ knowledges.
For this reason, the multitude that H/N herald with such optimism is not
possible or thinkable without an epistemical democracy in which science
stops being a slave of capitalism and the diverse forms of producing and
transmitting knowledge can coexist and complement each other. I am
referring to a world in which non-occidental systems of knowledge can be
incorporated into the curriculums of occidental universities on equal
terms in areas like law, medicine, biology, economy and philosophy. A
world in which for example the Yoruba cosmovision, the Buddhist
cosmovision of Zen, or the cosmovision of the Cuna Indians, can serve to
advance towards a more integral science, more organic, more centered in
the common good rather than in the needs of capital. Perhaps then and
only then, can we move forward towards a world in which many other
worlds would be possible.

### Notes

[^1]: This paper was previously published in Spanish in *La
    poscolonialidad explicada a los niños*, Editorial Universidad del
    Cauca, Instituto Pensar, Universidad Javeriana, 2005. It was
    presented in the International Symposium ‘¿Uno solo o varios mundos
    posibles?’ organized by the Instituto de Estudios Sociales
    Contempora´neos (IESCO). Bogotá, 710 June 2005.

[^2]: H/N say this humanistic revolution produced a type of immanent
    thought that found one of its most eminent representatives in father
    Bartolome ´ de las Casas. Las Casas is seen as a Renaissance thinker
    that stood up to the (sovereign brutality/unrivalled brutality) of
    the Spanish rulers. This utopian and anticolonialist vein would even
    reach Marx. But the utopian vision of the Renaissance was also
    eurocentric. For Las Casas, the indigenous are seen as equal to the
    Europeans ‘only in that they are potentially European’ (Hardt &Negri
    2001, p. 142). He believed that humanity was singular, he could not
    see that there are simultaneously many.

[^3]: In each passage from the modern to postmodern there is less and
    less distinction between inside and outside. Following Jameson, H/N
    affirm that the modern dialectic of inside and outside has been
    replaced by a set of degrees and intensities. ‘The binaries that
    define the modern conflict have faded away’ (Hardt & Negri 2001, p.
    202).

[^4]: H/N talk about a ‘dialectic of colonialism’ belonging to the
    project of modernity that consists of the following: ‘The identity
    of the European I is produced in this dialectical movement. Once the
    colonial subject is constructed as an absolute Other, he can be
    subsumed (annulled or integrated) into a more elevated unity/unit.
    Only by means of the opposition to the colonized does he really
    become himself, the metropolitan subject’ (Hardt & Negri 2001, p.
    152). That is to say that colonialism is a ‘dialectic of
    recognition’, just as Hegel saw it, but that today it no longer has
    meaning/purpose because Empire (the owner) no longer needs to affirm
    himself in opposition to his ‘other’ (the slave).

[^5]: The emphasis is mine.

[^6]: It is necessary to point out that H/N are correct when they
    identify the ‘Renaissance’ as a phenomenon that occurs in part
    before 1492, alluding to the experience of the Florentine Republic
    later theorized by Machiavelli. However it is necessary to qualify
    that experience because the formation of the world-system that began
    in 1492 contributed to the destruction of that first democratic
    experience in Europe. After 1492, the installation of a
    transcendental world design began, reflected for example in the
    imposition of only one language over vast plurilinguistical
    territories inside Europe itself.

[^7]: They do not even acknowledge that during the thirteenth century,
    the time they choose to start their genealogy of Empire, Europe was
    only a small and unimportant province when compared with the great
    civilization that was developing in the Islamic world (Dussel 1999,
    pp. 149-151). It is not until the foundational event of 1492, with
    the appearance of an unprecedented commercial circuit across the
    Atlantic, that Europe becomes the ‘center’ of a truly world-wide
    process of capital accumulation.

[^8]: H/N nonetheless declare that they are critics of eurocentrism. In
    the section titled ‘Two Italians in India’ in Multitude, H/N give an
    account of how Alberto Moravia and Pier Paolo Pasolini viewed India.
    Moravia tries to understand why India is so different from Italy,
    while Pasolini tries to understand why it is so similar. Neither of
    the two, however, can escape the necessity to take Europe as the
    universal criteria of measure, in this way falling into a
    Eurocentric vision of the world. H/N affirm that the only way to
    avoid eurocentrism is to renounce any kind of universal norm with
    which to evaluate cultural differences. Italy and India are not
    different, butunique. To them, with the notion of ‘singularity’
    developed by Gilles Deleuze, we can abandon the concept of
    ‘Otherness’ that has functioned as a cornerstone of eurocentrism.
    This entails thinking of cultural difference not as otherness but as
    singularity. According to H/N, ‘Cultural difference should be
    conceived in itself as singularity, without substantiating itself in
    the concept of the ‘other’.’ In a similar way, all cultural
    singularities should be considered not as anachronistic survivals of
    the past, but as equal participants in our common present. While we
    continue to strictly consider European society as the norm against
    which to measure modernity, many areas of Africa, as well other
    subordinate areas of the world, will not be comparable; but when we
    recognize the singularities and plurality inside modernity, we will
    begin to understand that Africa is as modern as Europe. Not more, or
    less, but different (Hardt & Negri 2004, pp. 156157). But Mignolo
    would say that this is a eurocentric critique of eurocentrism
    because the exaltation of ‘singularity’ corresponds precisely to the
    postmodern reorganization of colonial narratives of representation
    (Mignolo 2002, p. 228).

[^9]: The emphasis is mine.

[^10]: This means that the use and abundance of natural resources
    (natural capital) is no longer sufficient to develop. Now what is
    important is the intelligent use of those resources by social actors
    to make them more productive.

[^11]: Sustainable development can be defined as ‘a development that
    satisfies the necessities of the present, without putting in danger
    the capacity of future generations to attend to their own needs’.
    This definition was first used in 1987 in the World Commission of
    the Environment of the ONU, created in 1983. The economists
    concerned with sustainable development pointed out that the ability
    to satisfy the needs of the future depends on how much equilibrium
    is reached between the social, economic and environmental needs in
    the decisions that are made today.

[^12]: Escobar affirms that ‘we could be transitioning from a regime of
    ‘organic’ (premodern) and ‘capitalized’ (modern) nature to a regime
    of ‘technonature’ made by new forms of science and technology’
    (Escobar 2004, p. 387).

[^13]: Agenda 21 was one of the 5 fundamental agreements reached in the
    Rio de Janeiro Conference. According to this agenda, the nations who
    signed the agreement made a commitment to guarantee the ‘sustainable
    development’ of their economies, in such a way that natural
    resources could be managed intelligently in order to satisfy the
    needs of this generation, without compromising the welfare of future
    generations.

[^14]: Research in genetic engineering is very expensive and demands a
    large technological infrastructure. This is why concentrated mostly
    in the United States, Europe and Japan, but is financed in large
    part by private enterprises. In recent years we have observed the
    formation of huge economic monstrosities in this sector. A few
    specialized enterprises in biotechnology gradually absorb smaller
    companies as they merge with other gigantic companies, until they
    form real monopolies on a transnational scale that control the
    market of agriculture and health for the entire planet. In the
    course of the next decades, it is estimated that half a dozen
    multinationals will control 90 percent of the world’s food sources.

[^15]: General Agreement on Trades and Tariffs.

[^16]: This acronym makes reference to ‘Trade Related Intellectual
    Property Rights’. As a part of the multilateral agreements of the
    GATT, the TRIP obliges signatory states to adopt a system of
    intellectual property for microorganisms and plant varieties. Under
    pressure from the multinationals by way of the United States’
    government (for example in accords like the Free Trade Agreement)
    the concession of patents over biological material is presented as
    the only mechanism for the protection of intellectual property, even
    though the GATT accords do not specifically address this. There are
    other ways of protecting intellectual property without resorting to
    patents.

[^17]: The OMPI has 177 member States, is headquartered in Geneva and
    concerns itself with all matters related to the protection of
    intellectual property in the world. It supervises various
    international agreements, two of which (the Paris Agreement for the
    Protection of Intellectual Property and the Berna Agreement for the
    Protection of Literary and Artistic Works) constitute the foundation
    of the intellectual property sector.

[^18]: In order for a patent to be granted, the intellectual product has
    to satisfy at least two criteria: that it is an invention, that is
    to say that it represents an (innovation/novelty), and that the
    innovation has ‘practical utility’, in such a way that it can
    benefit all of society.

[^19]: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001325/132540s.pdf

[^20]: This agreement requires member nations to protect regions rich in
    biodiversity, species threatened with extinction and local knowledge
    related to the conservation of the environment. In relation to this
    last point, the CDB establishes the following: ‘in accordance with
    their national legislation, \[every country\] will respect, preserve
    and maintain the knowledge, innovations and practices of local and
    indigenous communities that involve traditional ways of life
    pertinent to the conservation and sustainable use of biological
    diversity and promote its wider application, with the approval and
    the participation of those who possess this knowledge, innovations
    and practices’. See:
    [http://www.biodiv.org/doc/legal/cbd-es.pdf](numbering.xml)

    ### References

    Castro-Gómez, Santiago (2005) *La hybris del punto
    cero*. *Ciencia*, *raza e ilustración en la Nueva
    Granada* *(1750-1816)*. Bogotá, Colombia: Pontificia Universidad
    Javeriana.

    Dussel, Enrique (1999) ‘Más allá del eurocentrismo:
    el sistema-mundo y los límites de la modernidad’, in *Pensar (en)
    los intersticios*. *Teoría y Práctica de la Crítica Poscolonial*,
    eds Santiago, Castro-Gómez, Oscar Guardiola-Rivera and Carmen
    Milla´n de Benavides, Bogota ´, Colombia: CEJA.

    Hardt, Michael & Negri, Antonio (2001) Imperio. Bogota ´, Colombia:
    Ediciones desde abajo.

    Hardt, Michael & Antonio, Negri (2004) Multitud. Guerra y democracia
    en la era del Imperio. Barcelona, Spain: Debate.

    Mignolo, Walter (2002) 'Colonialismo global, capitalismo and
    hegemonía epistémica,' in *Indisciplinar las ciencias sociales.
    Geopoliticas del conocimiento y colonialidad del poder*, eds
    Catherine Walsh, Freya Schiwy, Santiago Castro-Go ´mez. Quito,
    Ecuador: Universidad Andina Simón Bolívar/Ediciones Abya-Yala.

    Shiva, Vandana (2001) Biopiratería. El saqueo de la naturaleza y el
    conocimiento. Barcelona, Spain: Icaria editorial.

    Ulloa, Astrid (2004) *La construcción del native*
    *ecológico. Complejidades*, *paradojas y dilemas de la
    relación entre los movimientos indígenas y
    el *a*mbientalismo en. Colombia*. Bogotá, Colombia**:** Instituto
    Colombiano de Antropología e Historia — ICANH.


Jonathan Beller

## WITHIN THE IMAGE

Portions of this essay were originally published as "Wagers Within the
Image: Rise of Visuality, Transformation of Labour, Aesthetic Regimes"
in Culture Machine, vol. 12, 2012; http://www.culturemachine.net

Let us examine a few consequences of the industrialization of the
visual. As IPO after IPO seem to demonstrate, to look is to labor:
looking itself is posited as value-productive labor. We know this now.
In the cinematic mode of production this generalizes to what I called
‘the attention theory of value’.[^1] Today, after the internet
revolution (or, perhaps equally, counter-revolution), this relation
between screen-time and social production is increasingly pre-supposed.
Of course the energy levels, control modules and digitized metrics of
interactivity have been vertiginously intensified. Here we must remark
that with the digitization of the screen as socio-biological interface,
with the ramification of both its functionality and the intensive
development of a metrics of attention, the stock prices of media
companies such as Google are what they are because they are exploits:
schemas for the expropriation of value produced by the users (and
therefore the used). Early dot.com markets picked up on this shift
before it was widely understood. Today, this arrangement of
screen-cybernetics along with an increasingly precise metrics of
attention has its sights on nearly every aspect of lived and to-be-lived
time, even those forms of time that are engaged in organized struggle
against capitalist forms of domination. As has been remarked, the
perception of Facebook’s and Twitter’s future monetization potential
increases with every ‘Twitter revolution’: unrest in Tunisia, Cairo,
Madrid and New York become bankable events for new media corporations in
ways at once departing from but analogous to what news has long been for
print and television.

This interface between spectator and social machinery, realized as ‘the
image’ (which received rigorous critical analysis by the Frankfurt
School, the situationists (Debord) and feminist film theory), has been
generalized to the omnipresent screen and is also being extended to the
other platforms and senses: ‘the computer,’ ‘the tablet,’ and ‘the
cellphone’ – all of which appear increasingly similar. Now, of course,
the programme is being extended to sound, smell, touch and taste – music
and game sounds, obviously, but also programmed shopping environments
(which themselves extend into the urban fabric) organized by
architecture, texture, scent, and arguably salt, sugar and fat. These
innovations and their convergence (towards the omnipresent, omnivorous
and indeed omniscient cyber-spatialized
mall-military-prison-post-industrial cosmopoplex) bring about new levels
of interactivity as well as new and ever more elaborate metrics for the
organization and parsing of attention-production.

Such a transformation of the role of visuality, sensuality and their
media technologies in social production and reproduction necessitated
the formulation of the above mentioned attention theory of value, which
reduces to the labor theory of value at sub-light (sub-cinematic) speeds
but allows value formations to persist for a while in the electronic
matrix in non-monetized forms. The theory posits that attention produces
value in at least three ways:

1\. Attention valorizes media bytes and pathways in ways that can be
monetized – paintings, films, war propaganda, advertisements; and
monetized on spec: Yahoo, Google, Facebook, Twitter, Groupon (these are
all forms of expropriation through privatization of the commons). While
there are various levels and/or strategies for the valorization of
attentional labor (from ticket sales, to the sale of advertising, to the
IPO), what needs to be remarked upon is the still intensifying
capitalist ramification of the domain of the visual and, more generally,
the sensual. This domain (remember the shared institution called
privacy?), formerly part of the commons, is now pitted, furrowed and
trolled by the avatars of private entities bent upon the capture of
formerly extra-economic activities: from accessing water, to looking
around, to thought. The extent of this transformation that amalgamates
attention with privately owned mediation has completely reorganized the
logistics of perception, along with the mental functions that have
perception as their basis (which is to say all conscious, and arguably
the majority of unconscious processes, including language-function) on a
planetary scale.

2\. Thus we can say that the techno-economic shifts marked by cinema and
its legacy technologies utilize attention to retool spectators,
reworking on a minute-by-minute basis forms of social know-how, of
needs, of semiotic and affective capacities, and demanding a constant
revamping of ‘the soul’ (or of soullessness – as the case often seems to
be). Workers, prosumers, playborers and those described by Flusser in a
different context as ‘functionaries’ (those who work within the
programme of the camera) ready themselves and are thereby readied for
the developing exigencies of the market.[^2]

3\. Over time visuo-attentional transformations as indexed by emerging
media technologies reorganize (i.e., reprogramme) language-function
along with the imaginary and performativity such that the daily
retoolings can be dialectically incorporated into or functionalized by
the daily advances in technical interfaces. Althusserian ‘know-how,’ the
capacity to work for capital produced in schools and other ‘ideological
state apparatuses’,[^3] receives ever more penetrating and subtle
elaboration through the techno- capitalist capture of the
‘cognitive-linguistic.’ It thus participates in what Virno, giving new
life to a term from Marx, effectively identifies as the subsumption of
‘the general intellect’.[^4] In a recent remark, Zizek has noted that
what Bill Gates accomplished with proprietary software was the
privatization of part of the general intellect, which we now rent.[^5]
The result is that privatized media are omnipresent in the praxis of
consciousness, never more than a couple of interfaces away from any and
all attentional practices, such that attention to any aspect of life
becomes a form of production in the social factory of capitalism.

Most of these relations discussed above could be, and indeed were,
derived, in one form or another, pre-internet: they were already
inherent in cinema and television, even though they have become fully
manifest only in the so-called digital age. However, given that capital
itself imposed a relentless digitization of life beginning in the
fifteenth century, it is more accurate to think of today’s ‘digital
revolution’ as Digitality 2.0. These relations of communication and
social cooperation were therefore incipient in the first digital
revolution, that of capital itself.

Thus, early in the twentieth century, one could already see that the
extension of media pathways was, in fact, the further ramification of
the life-world by capital-logic. The communist revolutionary filmmakers
marked capital’s encroachment on the visual as a site of struggle; Third
Cinema (the cinema of decolonization), in Solanas’ and Getino’s
manifesto, famously asserted that for the purposes of colonialism
Hollywood was more effective than napalm (2000). Today the habitation of
the senses by the logic of capitalized visuality is widespread,
structuring desire, performance, perception and self-perception on a
world scale, even in the most unlikely of places. For example, a recent
essay by Danny Hoffman entitled ‘Violent Virtuosity: Visual Labour in
West Africa’s Mano River War’ argues that the spectacular crimes against
others in the region are precisely that: spectacles of maiming and mass
murder designed to garner attention in a world-media system (which
includes broadcast news, the internet and the U.N.) that rewards Africa
for specific kinds of self-production.[^6] As Hoffman demonstrates
through a close analysis of photographic and videographic materials,
‘This was a war structured by the economy of attention. To profit in
this economy, combatants and non- combatants were required to play to an
audience that they knew was there, but often could only sense or
apprehend in the most abstract way’.[^7] Although this should be obvious
it bears emphasizing: just because there is no computer in the room does
not mean that one escapes its programme.

One sees two significant factors in this global distribution of the
logistics of the image-interface: first, that the struggle for attention
is a struggle for existence at many levels. And second, that restricting
ourselves to categories that are marked only as politico-economic ones
does not allow us to resolve the specific aspects of this struggle. Very
simply, race, gender, nationality and other ‘socio-historical’
categories must therefore be thought in their economic determinations
within (and in excess of) the attention economy.

### Within the Image / The System of Global Apartheid

The increasing power of visual and digital media gave rise to new forms
of cultural imperialism (which, in case there was ever any doubt, is
actually real imperialism by other or additional means). Martin Jay has
identified various ‘scopic regimes of modernity,’ Regis Debray analyses
the emergence of what he calls the ‘videosphere’ which overtakes the
‘logosphere’ in the 19th century and Nick Mirzoeff in The Right to Look
identifies complexes of visuality spanning the plantation (1660-1865),
imperialism (1857-1947), and military industrialism (1945-present,
Mirzoeff’s periodizations).[^8] We can clearly grasp from this
intensification of the visual (however periodized and parsed) that
capital targets not just territory but also consciousness, visual
relations and the imagination itself in its struggle to organize
production – which is to say, value-productive labor, and therefore
corporeal performance. Capital’s geographical expansion outwards is
accompanied by a corporeal corkscrewing inward. Therefore, the visual,
the cultural, the imaginal and the digital – as the de/re-
terriorialization of plantation and factory dressage, Protestant ethics,
manners and the like – are functionalized as gradients of control over
production and necessarily therefore of struggle. This struggle for
shares of social wealth is at once over images and within images.

The movement from print and semiotics to visuality and affect, which
could broadly be said to characterize the current politico- economic
transition from the paradigm of the factory to that of the social
factory, dialectically produces the increasing slippage of the signifier
from the signified. This slippage and the consequent vanishing of the
Real should be historicized and thus understood as a result of the
penetration of the life-world by images; the increasing gap between
signifier and signified indexes technical degrees of social
cyberneticization and real subsumption. In historical order,
linguistics, psychoanalysis, semiotics, deconstruction, postmodernism,
virtual reality and reality-TV are all symptoms and accommodations of
the scrambling of traditional language function by the intensification
and increasing omnipresence of images. As argued in *The Cinematic Mode
of Production*, the rise of late- 19th and 20th century humanistic
disciplines can be characterized by innovations in their treatment of
language and therefore can be used to index or periodize the
quantitative intensification of visuality.[^9] Each intensification of
the disruption of linguistic function by images along with the
consequent denaturing of ‘natural’ language requires a new discipline
capable of negotiating a receding Real; the sheer quantity of visual
processing required by techno-capitalism inaugurates changes in the
qualities of thought. The linguistic commons along with its ability to
slow down images and configure the Real is put under siege by visual and
then digital culture. This siege results in a continuous and radical
re-programming of the cognitive-linguistic. The structure, functions and
capacities of words themselves today bear the mark of digitization.
Though this hypothesis remains to be demonstrated in detail, we might
glean from the mutations in the form of literature during modernity and
post-modernity the breadth and consequences of such transformations. A
line drawn from the fragmentation of narrative at the turn of the 20th
century to the veritable demise of English departments at the turn of
the 21st pretty much tells the recent story of language’s purchase on
the world. If we were serious about taking the measure of linguistic
decay, the withering of the Real, the absolute failure of semiotics and,
more generally, of representation we could ruefully add to the evidence
the 2012 U.S. Republican primary debates.

If capital expands through the development of visuality and the
consequences of visuality include the evisceration, or at the very
least, the reprogramming of linguistic capacity, then it is clear that
socio-historical categories, themselves nothing other than the
organization and semioticization of appearances, are also economic ones.
While there is significant work tracking the interpenetration of
economic vectors and those of race, nation and gender, disappointingly,
it has also been possible for a self-identified leftist political
economy to view racial and gendered formations as somehow epiphenomenal.
This is a political as well as an analytical error. ‘Race’ and ‘gender’,
which is to say race and gender as such, are from (at least) the early
modern period onward ineluctably tied to scopic regimes and therefore to
economic ones. In other words, these dynamics are constitutive of
technologies themselves. Thus it is incorrect to just state, for
example, that photography objectifies women or racial minorities.
Rather, one has to see the social role of the media platform as also
constitutive of the platform. What photography ‘is’ has everything to do
with its social functions, meaning that the objectification of women is
part of what photography is, and the legacies of colonialism and slavery
are embedded in its history and technical form.[^10] Otherwise, one
grasps a platform fetishistically, as a reification of social relations.
IBM developed the punch card to cross-reference German populations for
Nazis looking for Jews, gypsies and homosexuals during the Holocaust and
this development was a precursor to modern computing.[^11] The social
function is embedded in the machine, just as the role of computation in
financialization and in the organizing of labor practices in China is
also part of the meaning of the computer. Race and gender are endemic to
technological form and technological form is endemic to political
economy. To argue otherwise is to engage in technological determinism
and fetishistic abstraction.

The investor consolidation of major industrial media platforms, from
photography through cinema, video, reality-TV (which, for a decade at
least, has made the hyphen between ‘reality’ and ‘TV’ mandatory) and the
ambient computer is to be understood in part as a series of endeavors to
profitably manage the transformed and transforming situation of
language, race and gender vis-à-vis real transformations in
techno-social mediations. Here we might identify four fundamental visual
media shifts along with their disciplinary consequences: the visual
marking and promulgation of race and gender differences alongside modern
sociology (Stage 1: the art of photo-graphy); Hollywood’s splicings of
black musical talent onto white faces and the generalization of montage
alongside psychoanalytic attention to language’s break-down products and
the dream as rebus (Stage 2: the rise of cinema); the promulgation of a
mythically all-white, consumerist world bent on denying racism and
imperialism on U.S. television alongside deconstruction’s placing of the
signified, experience, the Real and ‘being’ under erasure (Stage 3:
television/video); the emergence of virtuality alongside the imperative
to virtuosity (Stage 4: digitality). Taken together these periodized
clusters assemble techniques of subjectivity, of profitably re-mounting
a worker-subject able to function in a political economy characterized
by the long movement of value extraction from the scene of the
plantation and factory floor to that of the deterritorialized factory,
aka the scene of the screen and the social factory. Together these
stages create the conditions of possibility for the current regime of
Global Apartheid.

Clarity about the reconfiguration of subjectivity, language function and
of interiority by the intensification of visuality, along with the
consequent recession (devaluation) of the signified (Real) vis-à-vis the
inflation of the sign (image) reveals that there is not a single
iteration of social form that is separable from political-economic
history. This dialectic further insists that we consider the
mediological basis, that is, the system of support-apparatus- procedure
that Regis Debray argues underpins ‘mediological’ transmissions (in his
view incorrectly identified for the better part of a century as
‘communication’), of some other recent endeavors to treat the
transformation of the value form and the transformed situation of
labor.[^12]

In Empire, for example, Hardt and Negri return to Marx’s idea of social
cooperation as endemic to production and argue for the real subsumption
of society by capital. This real subsumption is stated as a fact, but we
might ask how is it accomplished? What is the material basis of
subsumption? What are the media of Empire? Paolo Virno (2004) has argued
convincingly that capital has captured the cognitive-linguistic
capacities of the species. Pointedly, he argues that we are now all
virtuosos who perform speech acts in accord with ‘the score’
orchestrated by capital – this, precisely, is the operation of the
general intellect. Post-Fordist production requires virtuosity for the
maintenance of capital expansion. Our cognitive-linguistic abilities
have been conscripted and expropriated. But again, what are the
mediological conditions of possibility of post-Fordism, and what are the
raced and gendered dimensions of the ‘servility’ Virno identifies?

Relatedly, we also have the work of Maurizio Lazzarato (1996), Christian
Marazzi (2010), Tiziana Terranova (2003) on ‘free labor’ and ‘cognitive
capitalism,’ providing us with a set of post- Fordist variants in which,
given the sublime expansion of the financial system, virtuosos, by and
large, accommodate themselves and their situations to the requisites of
capitalist society in the performance of cognitive labor in a way which,
according to some of these theorists, renders value immeasurable and the
significance of post-Fordist input potentially undecidable.

One might identify in these innovative modes of conceptualization a
relatively unacknowledged debt to the apparatus theory of Louis
Althusser (1971), to feminism (Kristeva 1982, Cixous, 1994, Haraway
1991) and Marxist feminism (Fortunati, 2007; Maria Mies, 1999), to
de/post-colonial and critical race theory (Fanon, 2008; Spillers, 1987;
Spivak, 1999), and to media theory. However, the dominant post-Marxist
arguments could be more cognisant of their conditions of possibility,
both in terms of the history of raced and gendered labor (the
socio-political techne) that inaugurated the very changes in the mode of
production being theorized, and in terms of the intellectual debts owed
for their own theoretical formulations. This debt is a matter of
citational politics, clearly, but not in any simple sense. These
theories have been built upon the labor of long suffering communities as
well as on their labor of insurrection and insurrectionary critique. For
let us agree to consider it a fact that revolutionary energies large and
small have advanced planetary intersubjectivity in their quest for
liberation even if these same energies have been domesticated by the
financialization of media platforms. We must therefore be relentlessly
critical when we observe that in spite of the mass basis of mediological
transformations, some critical micro-cultures now proceed as if the only
people worth having a conversation with are those avid readers of Badiou
and Agamben, a posture that belies the highly circumscribed standpoint
of the Franco-Italian insights. This insularity, palpable to readers
with roots and affinities in queer, of color, and global south
communities, underscores a widespread if disavowed complicity with
racism, sexism and eurocentrism in still all too Western theory.

The dearth of awareness of these multiple debts and of the historicity
of practices that form the new economic order of Empire is least true
for Terranova, who draws on feminism, cyber-feminism and critical race
theory. Because of this she is sometimes wrongly perceived as being less
original and innovative than her male counterparts. However, in arguing
that ‘the digital economy \[i\]s a specific mechanism of internal
“capture” of larger pools of social and cultural knowledge \[and that
t\]he digital economy is an important area of experimentation with value
and free cultural/affective labor,’ Terranova is clear that the exploit
of digital capitalism draws upon practices and inequalities that were
‘always and already capitalism’.[^13] In other words, for her at least,
racism and sexism are embroiled in capitalism, and it would seem
senseless to talk about (or critique) the latter in the absence of the
former.

Given these observations, one should see that the concrete elements of
the social: the ideological state apparatus, racial formations, the
visual turn, the cultural turn, the feminization of labor and the
servility and virtuosity of cognitive capitalism as part of the same
equation. This is one in which the capitalized image reconfigures
cultural praxis as a wholesale production site in ways that impose
servility and would delimit and even foreclose the emergence of
practicable anti-capitalist, anti-patriarchal, anti-racist and anti-
imperialist speech-acts. Material formations precisely delimit
speech-acts thus, because, generally speaking, the post-Fordist
attention economy still depends upon the patriarchal, white-
supremacist, imperialist organization of the global imaginary to
maximize returns. The ambient machines of the social, be they concrete
machines (cameras, cell phones, networks) or abstract machines (races,
laws, nations) are in fact real abstractions, that is, cut-n-mixable
instruments available for the virtuosic configuration of social
relations such that they adhere to the requisites of raced and gendered
capitalist exploitation.

To give but one example here of how a critique cognisant of these
relations might take form, Cindy Gao (2012) examines a series of videos
by Asian-American YouTube celebrities, including vlogs of NigaHiga and
KevJumba, and Wong Fu’s Yellow Fever, and characterizes their practice
of performing race as ‘virtuosic virtuality’.[^14] Without
essentializing identity (Gao sees the term Asian American as itself a
form of virtuality), the construct ‘virtuosic virtuality’ cranks up the
stakes of the virtual and suggests that, here at least, these
technologically enabled performances of ethnicity are subsumed by a
capitalism that still requires and indeed develops the racial regimes
that are the legacy of white supremacist capitalist patriarchy. Indeed
Gao shows that one can investigate this subsumption without insisting
that Marxism trumps critical race theory. It is rather that in making
the critique of a narrowly empowering Asian-American performativity
(narrow because achieved through the trafficking in gendered and racist
stereotypes), anti-racist and anti-capitalist critique go together. To
be a bit reductive, it is arguable that in the absence of anti-racist,
anti- capitalist critique the cultural movement is inevitably towards a
system of structural inequality that invents and indeed requires new
forms of racism – which is precisely what is going on with many of the
popular Asian-American YouTube celebrities (there are certain advances
but somebody has to pay, e.g., women, South Asians); or, the movement is
towards a critique of capitalism that sees racism as epiphenomenal
rather than constitutive and therefore uncritically replicates the
racist and eurocentric assumptions of the era.

Thus equipped we must confront the fact that increasingly, every ad we
see, every page we browse, every email we send, every word we say, every
thought we think and every dream we have is part of the production and
reproduction of capitalist society – sensuous labor 2.0. The various
media platforms, social categories, and imaginal iterations are one with
capital and these would script our participation in order to allow
capital to think in us and through us. I italicize ‘would’ here because
this point is both complex and contentious and appears to be moving
towards a genuine crisis. The dialectic requires that we have it both
ways. On the one hand, capitalist expropriation has never lain so
closely upon thought, utterance, the imagination and bodily practices –
it has engineered a networked cybernetic matrix of control, an
occupation that has seized the bio-social commons. Anti-racist,
anti-capitalist critique is ever more difficult to launch effectively,
since the general intellect, increasingly expropriated, thinks for
capital. On the other hand, and without doubt, real subsumption can
never be complete if it is to matter at all, which it does, if,
obviously, the thoughts (and indeed the material connections to life)
in, say, this essay, are to be anything more than a means by which you
advance your career. And whilst non-proprietary file sharing, p2p,
creative commons, copy-left, etc., are laudable endeavors, and
‘gateways’[^15] that may open to a post-capitalist society, it seems
premature to claim for any of these innovations that the medium is the
message. For these practices at present do not contain within themselves
a genuinely revolutionary critique or message (anti-racist,
anti-imperialist, prison abolitionist, environmentalist, feminist,
queer). It is not even clear that some of them are anti-capitalist.

With our language de-fanged, our critical theory suspect, and our
machines and imaginations complicit, where to turn? I suggest below that
there are discursive and aesthetic dimensions to contemporary life that
are incompletely explored. Here we must reconsider the third world, its
legacies of survival and heritable corporeal commons and the possible
non-capitalist transmission of these resources. The reconstitution of
consciousness in post- Fordism materially links each to all in ever more
intensive ways and raises question of solidarity, democracy and social
justice in new domains. As I will show, the attention economy induces a
movement from the wage to the wager, and with this shift demands an
analysis of the politics of the utterance and aesthetics of survival.

Experience teaches me that when discussing the logistics of the image
and social production/reproduction through digital interactivity and
human attention, I am obliged to add that none of these statements
regarding the violence of media-capitalism and its subsuming of the
life-world as well as many of its ‘alternatives,’ means to say that
‘prior’ forms of exploitation that are characteristic of feudal serfdom,
slavery, proletarianization, prostitution, domestic work, migrant labor,
or the labor of survival in either camps or the postmodern slum have
ceased to exist. Rather these persisting modes should be viewed as
conditions of dispossession which are coordinated and legitimated,
marginalized or made unrepresentable by the command-control apparatus of
the digital-visual via a calculus of the image that enlists our
for-profit participation in the capitalist
military-media-prison-industrial complex. From a macro-structural point
of view, human becoming is bent toward two dialectically identical ends:
capital accumulation and radical dispossession. The overall result is
the immeasurable violence of the world-wide suppression of democratic
becoming. We participate in this totalitarian systemic practice despite
the relatively clear facts that the earth is headed towards
environmental catastrophe and that two billion people (the entire
population of Earth in 1929) are even now laboring to survive actually
existing Armageddon. Given their intimate and indeed inescapable
connection to the world media- system and the attention economy, the
dispossessed have thus become the living substrate of contemporary
systems of representation.[^16] We write our revolutionary tracts on the
backs of slaves. Radical dispossession as the other side of a
world-media system is in the most literal sense the condition of
possibility for our contemporary thought and writing. It bears asking,
under what image or images do the radically dispossessed labor? And
also, what’s it to you?

The questions I pose at this point concern the images written over and
on the historically produced informatic black hole smothering the bottom
two billion denizens of postmodern globality. They are questions about
subalterns whom I have come to think should never be designated by the
sign bare life, but, at the very least, by the sign ‘bare life,’ now in
quotation marks. The quotation marks are there in order that the
signifier registers its own constitutive performativity in relation to
those who are being signified upon. ‘Bare life’ neither merely exists
nor merely appears but by virtue of a signifying process – a signifying
industrial complex – that codifies its messages on bodies presumed to be
incapacitated and unaccommodated to such an extent that they are beyond
the reach of dialogue. These bodies are thereby made to signify the
limit of sociality and presumed to exist in a condition of social death.
My point here is that whether it is Agamben selling philosophy books or
bankers and policy-makers selling bailouts and weapons, we find bodies
and populations being constituted as surfaces of inscription: bodies
whose living labor of survival serves to make them fodder for
philosophy, statistics, political theory, entrepreneurs, militaries,
banks and states. Subalterns are actively configured as the living
substrate of representation for capitalist mediation. In other words,
the unceasing dis-figuration of the masses is the price of success, but
the success belongs to someone else: the celebrity capitalists,
militarized nations, and some of their aspirant followers. Such is the
enclosure wrought by the world of technical images. Squatters,
trash-pickers, illegals, displaced populations, post-modern slaves, and
billions for whom we here have no names and whose deaths will not appear
in any newspaper, attend to the historically imposed exigencies of life.
Their attention to the world-machine of survival, their endeavors to
constitute themselves in myriad ways, underpin the spectacular- digital
of meaning, agency, and global citizenship. For the world- media system,
subaltern survival or death is mere raw material for semiotics, affect
and intensity. As threat, tragedy, irrational irruption or non-entity,
entire populations are bundled and sold, converted into semiotic and
affective chits for capital’s master-gamers.

We must register the violence endemic to the conversion of historically
dispossessed others into images and signs – in addition to objects (a
concern central to the work of the young urban photo- graffiti artist
JR) – because in being figured as bare life, multitudes, refugees,
tribes, slum-dwellers, or terrorists, and even when not being figured at
all, the capitalized universe of images and signs constitutes and
de-constitutes these beings (this flesh, to borrow from Hortense
Spillers, 1987) for its own purposes. As entity, non-entity, iPad,
auto-part, rare-earth metal, securitized population or void, the now
doubly dispossessed are materially and symbolically disappeared for
politico-economic ends. In other words, not only global commodity-chain
production (which relies on disappeared labor 1.0) but planetary
semiosis and affect-formation (which relies on disappeared labor 2.0)
are rooted in the biomass of a planet of persons excluded not just from
meaningful dialogue, but from dialogue. It should be underscored that
the movement from 1.0 to 2.0 is a movement that took place over a matter
of centuries of racialization and gendered violence but is today
‘noticeable’ which is to say ‘theoriseable’ because the chickens are
coming home to roost. As Césaire remarked, what was unforgiveable about
the Holocaust, was not the brutality, torture and murder, what was
unforgiveable was that the techniques of colonization were applied to
white people.[^17] Peoples of the Global South were the first ‘content
providers.’ Now the situation is generalized.

Understood in this way, it would appear that the result of not just
history, but also of the history of representation – representation now
‘fully’ captured by capital, and shunted into an informatics matrix in
which capital structures images and images structure sign function, and
sign function is endemic to social production and reproduction – has
been to make democracy structurally impossible. Such is the ‘reality’
for which the recession of the Real stands as symptom. The material
foreclosure of the logic endemic to the conceit of human being is the
technical achievement that provides the historical explanation for
‘being’ being placed under erasure in the realm of the sign.
Understanding philosophically, as it were, that with the expiration of
Western metaphysics one also confronts the expiration of humanism and
the conceits pertaining to ‘the human’ follows logically; however
understanding mediologically that this emptying out of tradition called
post-structuralism is consequent upon the historico-material conversion
and therefore demotion of ‘natural language’ into one medium among media
requires a materialist approach to the totality of informatic networks
that avowedly post-dialectical and post-historical thought cannot easily
accommodate. Admittedly, it might take a book-length study to properly
historicize Jacques Derrida’s *Of Grammatology* and to methodologically
‘comprehend’ the moment in intellectual history known as
‘deconstruction’ as a specific symptom of and in the long historical
process of uprooting and eviscerating language. Nonetheless, one might
speculate that the ‘being’ under erasure there was formerly assumed to
be part of the commons. As Kwame Anthony Appiah question indicated in
‘Is the Post- in Postmodernism the Post- in Postcolonial?’ there is an
intimate connection between the erosion of the birthrights of colonized
peoples and the erosion of the Western birthright purportedly guaranteed
by Western metaphysics. For our purposes here we may grasp that in both
the material and philosophical domains the basis and the rationale for
democracy have been steadily eroded. This somewhat controversial
hypothesis affirms what has been discernible at least since the onset of
post- modernity: because of shifts in the matrix of representation and
its material underpinnings, under advanced capitalism neither reality
nor being can be adequately mounted and sustained and thus neither
democratic representation nor perhaps democracy is possible. From a
technical perspective this is an advance. Dialectically speaking, from
this historically achieved and instrumental condition of generalized
simulation there is no return.

Put another way, having reached historically the general fulfillment of
what Marx saw clearly as the specific experience of the wage-laborer,
namely "the loss of reality," the real is gone and thus the
aestheticization of politics is complete. It would seem that Communism
must respond by politicizing simulation, which is to say, the universe
of appearances mediated by abstraction, which is to say, in short,
everything, however we must leave the very question of “the political”
along with the transformed ontology of “politics” itself for another
time.


### Reference List

Althusser, L. ‘Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses,*’ Lenin and
Philosophy and Other Essays*, trans. B. Brewster, Monthly Review Press,
1971.

Beller, J. *The Cinematic Mode of Production: Attention Economy and the
Society of the Spectacle*, Lebanon, NH: Dartmouth University Press,
2006.

Beller, J. ‘Paying Attention’, *Cabinet* 24, 2008,
http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/24/beller.php

Beller, J. ‘Camera Obscura After All: The Racist Writing With Light’, in
Jonathan Beller (ed.) *The Scholar and Feminist Online, Special Issue:
Feminist Media Theory, Iterations of Social Difference*, 2012.

Black, E. *IBM and the Holocaust: The Strategic Alliance Between Nazi
Germany and America’s Most Powerful Corporation*, Washington, D.C.:
Dialog Press, 2012.

Césaire, A. *Discourse on Colonialism*, trans. J. Pinkham, New York and
London: Monthly Review Press, 1972.

Cixous, H. *The Helene Cixous Reader*, New York and London: Routledge,
1994.

Cubitt, S. ‘The Political Economy of Cosmopolis’ in T. Scholz (ed.)
*Digital Labor*, New York and London: Routledge, 2012.

Debray, R. *Media Manifestos*, London: Verso, 1996.

Fanon, F. *Black Skin, White Masks*, New York: Grove Press, 2008.

Fortunati, L. ‘Immaterial Labor and Its Mechanisation’ in *ephemera*
7(1, 2007): 139-157.

Flusser, V. *Towards a Philosophy of Photography*, trans. A. Matthews,
London: Reaktion Books, 2000.

Gao, C. ‘Virtuosic Virtuality of Asian American Youtube Stars,’ in
Jonathan Beller (ed.) *The Scholar and Feminist Online, Special Issue:
Feminist Media Theory, Iterations of Social Difference*, 2012.

Haraway, D. ‘A Cyborg Manifesto,’ in *Simians, Cyborgs and Women*. New
York and London: Routledge, 1991.

Hoffman, D. ‘Violent Virtuosity: Visual Labor in West Africa’s Mano
River War,’ *Anthropological Quarterly*, Vol. 84, no. 4 (Fall, 2011):
949-976.

Jay, M. ‘Scopic Regimes of Modernity’, in *Vision and Visuality*, New
York: The New Press, 1988.

Kristeva, J. *Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection*, New York:
Columbia University Press, 1982.

Lazzarato, M. ‘Immaterial Labour’ in M. Hardt. & P. Virno (eds),
*Radical Thought in Italy: A Potential Politics*, Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1996, pp. 133-147.

Marazzi, C. *The Violence of Financial Capitalism*, New York:
Semiotext(e), 2010.

Mies, M. *Patriarchy and Accumulation on a World Scale*, London: Zed
Books, 1999.

Spillers, H. ‘Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar Book,’
*diacritics* 17: 2 (Summer, 1987): 65-81.

Spivak, G. *A Critique of Postcolonial Reason*, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1999.

Terranova, T. ‘Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy’,
2003,
http://www.electronicbookreview.com/thread/technocapitalism/voluntary.

Virno, P. *A Grammar of the Multitude*, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2004.

Zizek, S. ‘The Revolt of the Salaried Bourgeoisie’, *London Review of
Books*, Vol. 34 No. 2, (26 January, 2012): 9-10.

[^1]: J. Beller, *The Cinematic Mode of Production: Attention Economy
    and the Society of the Spectacle*, Lebanon, NH: Dartmouth University
    Press, 2006.

[^2]: V. Flusser, *Towards a Philosophy of Photography*, trans. A.
    Matthews. London: Reaktion Books, 2000, p. 27.

[^3]: L. Althusser, ‘Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses,*’ Lenin
    and Philosophy and Other Essays*, trans. B. Brewster, Monthly Review
    Press, 1971.

[^4]: P. Virno, *A Grammar of the Multitude*, Cambridge: MIT Press,
    2004.

[^5]: S. Zizek, ‘The Revolt of the Salaried Bourgeoisie’, *London Review
    of Books*, Vol. 34 No. 2, (26 January, 2012): 9-10.

[^6]: D. Hoffman, ‘Violent Virtuosity: Visual Labor in West Africa’s
    Mano River War,’ *Anthropological Quarterly*, Vol. 84, no. 4 (Fall,
    2011): 949-976.

[^7]: D. Hoffman, ‘Violent Virtuosity: Visual Labor in West Africa’s
    Mano River War,’ *Anthropological Quarterly*, Vol. 84, no. 4 (Fall,
    2011), p. 952

[^8]: First source: M. Jay, ‘Scopic Regimes of Modernity,’ In *Vision
    and Visuality*, New York: The New Press, 1988.

    Second source: Debray, R. *Media Manifestos*. London: Verso, 1996.

[^9]: J. Beller, *The Cinematic Mode of Production: Attention Economy
    and the Society of the Spectacle*, Lebanon, NH: Dartmouth University
    Press, 2006.

[^10]: J. Beller, ‘Camera Obscura After All: The Racist Writing With
    Light,’ In Jonathan Beller (ed.) *The Scholar and Feminist Online,
    Special Issue: Feminist Media Theory, Iterations of Social
    Difference*, 2012.

[^11]: E. Black, *IBM and the Holocaust: The Strategic Alliance Between
    Nazi Germany and America’s Most Powerful Corporation*, Washington,
    D.C.: Dialog Press, 2012.

[^12]: R. Debray, 2006.

[^13]: T. Terranova, ‘Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital
    Economy’, 2003,
    http://www.electronicbookreview.com/thread/technocapitalism/voluntary.

[^14]: C. Gao, ‘Virtuosic Virtuality of Asian American Youtube Stars,’
    In Jonathan Beller (ed.) *The Scholar and Feminist Online, Special
    Issue: Feminist Media Theory, Iterations of Social Difference*,
    2012.

[^15]: S. Cubitt, ‘The Political Economy of Cosmopolis’ in T. Scholz.
    (ed.) *Digital Labor*, New York and London: Routledge, 2012.

[^16]: J. Beller, ‘Paying Attention’, *Cabinet 24* (2008),
    http://www.cabinetmagazine.org/issues/24/beller.php

[^17]: A. Césaire, *Discourse on Colonialism*, trans. J. Pinkham, New
    York and London: Monthly Review Press, 1972.


Josephine Berry Slater

## NEUTRALIZING ENGAGED SUBJECTS IN THE CREATIVE CITY

This article is a version of a lecture given by the author in the course
Biopolitics and Aesthetics, Centre for Cultural Studies at Goldsmiths
University

During the Blair government, a new criminal offence was passed for
nearly every day spent in office – this period saw the biggest expansion
in the legal regulation of conduct of any time since the end of WW2.
This was also a period which saw an explosion in the commissioning of
public art across Britain – a commissioning frenzy, buoyed by the
liquidity of the financial bubble, which has consequently been called
‘the public art bubble’. I think these phenomena can be linked, because
what they represent are two prongs of a pincer form of governmentality
which acts to engage and activate subjects with the one prong, while
neutralizing them with the other. Or put another way, it acts to engage
certain capacities, conducts and valorisable behaviors – not least the
participation in aesthetic spectatorship – while at the same time
disabling, discouraging and disallowing other forms of conduct deemed
disruptive to the smooth functioning of the state and some of its
principle activities; namely the production of a large enough, healthy,
peaceable, active and economically productive population. These two
phenomena – the offence bubble and the public art bubble – can also be
linked as governmental strategies for managing the antagonisms and
painful inequalities of neoliberal capitalism as it comes to bear upon
the everyday spaces of life in post-industrial urban society.

We are looking at a complicated conjunction of issues – neoliberal urban
development, the legal regulation of behavior, and the role of public
art within the post-industrial city; each has its own specificities,
developmental history and extensive body of knowledge attached. But what
I want to do here is to thread them together according to certain
‘regulatory ideas’, as Foucault would say, which intersect and bind
together aesthetic, governmental and economic fields. The first ones I
want to think about are the concepts of ‘event’ and ‘milieu’. The
act-painting of the ’40s and ’50s, and the Happenings of the ’60s swept
the artwork clean first of representation, and then more broadly of
‘retinality’ as art departed pictorial and sculptural frameworks, in a
bid to convene a space in which something, an ‘act’ and later an
‘event’, could occur. These twinned notions of ‘act’ and ‘event’ are
deeply implicated in the multiple breaching of the art/life divide
undertaken by neo-avant-garde artists of this period, and presuppose
art’s ability to reach out of itself to effect some kind of wider
transformation of life and the world around it, whether that be: the
life of the artist or the viewer as it coincides with a set of
materials, ideas or conditions during the act of creation; the way parts
of the sensorium and cognitive apparatus become newly open and
differently sensitised through an encounter with art – what Rancière
calls the ‘redistribution of the sensible’; or art’s wider, subtle and
unknowable infection of the social and physical environment,
‘indirectly, as a stored code’, as Kaprow put it.

Essential to the myriad possible manifestations of the ‘event’ is the
notion that it takes place in an ‘expanded field’ that entails a
potentially infinite series of elements; a field which admits new
contextual, environmental, social, sensual, emotional, institutional,
political and material dimensions into the conception of the artwork.
This expansion could be understood as a growing reflection on and
recursive folding inwards of the artwork’s relationality. This folding
inwards of the world, and unfurling outwards of the artwork, leads in
numerous directions, from minimalism, to conceptualism to institutional
critique, from body art, to performance to media art and net art, and so
on. However, we need to maintain our focus on the notion of ‘event’ as a
specific aspect of the artwork’s expanded field of signification in
order to induce an understanding of how developments in art are
reflective of those of biopolitical governmentality and, for our
purposes here, within the neoliberal moment of urban development. We
also need to think about how the extension and flexibilisation of the
artwork makes itself newly available to deployment within a governmental
and economic expansion that operates upon ever finer fissures of
subjectivity.

In his lecture series *Security, Territory, Population* (1977-78),
Foucault discusses – in the context of the development of the modern
state and its governmental rationality – the mid-17^th^ century
production of a new spatial relationship of sovereignty to its
territory, one in which the capital city comes to the fore. He
concentrates on a text called *La Métropolitée*, written by a French
protestant émigré called Alexandre Le Maitre, for the protestant kind of
Sweden. In it Le Maitre puts forwards general recommendations for the
good spatial layout of a territory; one which will open up the territory
to the ‘general network of the sovereign’s orders and controls’. Without
getting too distracted by the detail of his schema, what Foucault seizes
on is how he draws together the problems of sovereignty with a set of
specifically urban problematics. He writes,

In short, the interesting thing is Le Maitre dreams of connecting the
political effectiveness of sovereignty to a spatial distribution. A good
sovereign, be it a collective or individual sovereign, is someone well
placed within a territory, and a territory that is well policed in terms
of its obedience to the sovereign is a territory that has a good spatial
layout.[^1]

For Le Maitre, the capital city is the ultimate arena for the production
of an ideal set of spatial conditions of sovereignty, and the exemplary
life it will induce and that will act as a model for the entire
territory. Foucault then tracks the changing relationship between the
development of towns and cities in the context of the production of a
new ‘raison d’Etat’, or state reason, which began to see the population
as the state’s defining strength and, in response, developed a whole
series of techniques to safeguard, nurture and monitor populations.
Towns and cities, naturally, became a focal point for these developing
techniques as a new rationality of the state met the demands for growth,
increased production and circulation imposed by a burgeoning capitalism.
And here, with this new ‘securitsed’, expanded and speculative approach
to city planning, is where we connect back to the notion of the event.

Looking at the development of French cities such as Nantes and Vigny in
the 18^th^ century, Foucault identifies not only a response to the
requirement to open up cities in order to better connect them to
external routes, to deal with overcrowding and eliminate dangerous
elements and so-called miasmas, but also a new consideration of possible
future events that are not precisely knowable or controllable. The
calculation with and management of an indefinite series of accumulating
and mobile units – ‘circulation, x number of carts, x number of
passers-by, x number of thieves, x number of miasmas, and so on’ – is,
he says, the essential characteristic of the mechanism of security. As
opposed to the ‘disciplinary’ structuring of space (here he means, the
hierarchical spatial orderings of the Middle Ages) the securitized
structuring of space ‘will try to plan a milieu in terms of events or
series of events or possible elements, \[…\] that will have to be
regulated within a multivalent and transformable network.’[^2] He
ventures a further definition: ‘The space in which a series of uncertain
elements unfold is, I think, roughly what one can call the milieu.’[^3]
Borrowing the concept of ‘milieu’ from biology, and imposing it
retrospectively onto the problem of city planning in this era of 17^th^
century *Raison d’Etat*, Foucault continues,

The milieu is a certain number of combined overall effects bearing on
all who live in it. It is an element in which a circular link is
produced between effects and causes… More disease will obviously mean
more deaths. More deaths will mean more cadavers and consequently more
miasmas, and so on. \[…\] Finally, the milieu appears as a field of
intervention in which, instead of affecting individuals as a set of
legal subjects capable of voluntary actions \[…\] or as a multiplicity
of organisms, of bodies capable of performances – one tries to affect,
precisely, a population. I mean a multiplicity of individuals who are
and fundamentally and essentially only exist biologically bound to the
materiality within which they live. \[…\] What one tries to reach
through this milieu, is precisely the conjunction of a series of events
produced by these individuals, population, and groups and quasi natural
events which occur around them.[^4]

In this lecture series, Foucault goes on to argue and demonstrate how
this urban model of sovereignty, one that he says is extended
paradigmatically to the whole territory in the form of the police state,
will give way to a more agriculturally focused model of governmentality
in the 18^th^ century. His argument here is subtle: the mode of state
rationality developed in the 17^th^ century, that he identifies as
*raison d’Etat*, entails a logic that concedes that the state is its own
manifest destiny – it no longer imagines itself as becoming an empire,
or ultimately as merging with the cosmic unity and temporality of the
heavens. It is held in a balance of power, after the Treaty of
Westphalia in 1648, with the other European states, and now turns
inwards, discovering the utility of its own population which it starts
to police in the interests of population expansion (which promised the
freedom to pay lower wages), increased activity, greater levels of
commodity production, higher levels of export and hence growing revenues
to the treasury coffers.

This logic changes, however, to some degree in the 18^th^ century, with
the advent of the physiocrats and the *économistes*. While *raison
d’Etat* is retained in so far as the state still regards itself, its
continuation, as its aim and destiny, nevertheless it is filled with a
different content. This involves a refinement of its method of
governmentality, from one of state intervention and control (the police
state), to one of *laissez-faire*. So instead of extending the spatial
model of the city to the entire territory – because it is in the city
that the techniques of security and policing are developed – the idea is
to ‘let nature take its course’. In regards to grain production, for
example, the idea was to get rid of price controls and the control of
import and export. This way production would be self-regulating,
responding more agilely to the market value of grain, and ultimately
better avoid the grain shortages and famines that were a frequent result
of state intervention. The peasants would be better off, better fed and
more productive.

Without wishing to go too deeply into this historical sequence, what is
important is that Foucault argues both in *Security, Territory,
Population* and *The Birth of Biopolitics* that from the 18^th^ century,
an ‘art of government’ came to replace the more disciplinary and
interventionist governmental reason that preceded it, and that this
later art of government would retain the population as its focus – but
strive to fulfill the interests of the state (higher levels of
production, greater circulation and export of goods etc.) through an
*economic* reason. This economic art of government is based on the
notion, formulated by Adam Smith, of the ‘secret hand of the market’; a
quasi-natural force that can better settle the balance of competing
interests than any more rigid and partial intervention of the state.

However, what is important here, and for our thinking about the links
between the aesthetic blurring of art and life and biopower, is that the
economic governmental reason retains the centrality of the ‘event’ and
the ‘milieu’, the speculative balancing of a set of variables, which is
expanded outwards from the setting of the town and its conditions, to
the whole complexion of factors, interests and conditions that it needs
to balance – one that would increasingly resolve into what we call ‘the
economy’. Perhaps we can even go as far as to say that *the economy is
‘the event’ par excellence* of this governmental rationality. As
Foucault states many times, this entails a population-scale thinking –
one which departs from earlier, religious or pastoral models of
sovereignty in which the entire flock must be sacrificed to save a
single soul, and conversely, the single soul must be sacrificed for the
salvation of the flock – an economy of souls in which every individual
matters. With biopower, what we see is the state intervening only

To regulate, or rather to allow the well-being, the interest of each to
adjust itself in such a way that it can actually serve all. The state is
envisioned as the regulator of interests and no longer as the
transcendent and synthetic principle of the transformation of the
happiness of each into the happiness of all.[^5]

In this respect, the individual ceases to be important, and of interest;
but the conditions affecting the mass of interactions between
individuals, the ‘multiplicity of individuals’, indeed the population,
becomes the site of state intervention. I want to take a bit of a leap
of argumentative faith, and suggest that we can plot a related
development in art from the presiding concern with the individual object
– the ‘hard object’ – as it is sometimes called with reference to
sculpture, to an increasingly distributed aesthetic field of attention
and concern. It is interesting to consider this shift in terms of a
movement from the depth model of the Christian and enlightenment
subject, in which all orders of experience are of moral if not economic
importance, to a flattened model of the secular and biopolitical subject
in which the individual becomes a moment, or the centre of a contingent
set of effects, within a mobile series of interactions. We must, of
course, be careful to distinguish between the objectives of a
governmental reason concerned primarily with the economic and its
attendant, opportune conditions of life, and the motivating forces
behind this diffusion of the artwork into a relational field. Or, put
another way, the reorientation of the aesthetic field of attention from
the single object often involves a critique of individuality which heads
in a very different direction from the biopolitical reconception of
individuality as a unit of interaction within a field of forces and
effects; one of a variety of mobile units that comprise the ‘milieu’ and
the ‘event’.

Roland Barthes’ concept of the ‘death of the author’ and the ‘birth of
the reader’ can be related to the notion of ‘singularity’ – that which
defies the opposition between universal and particular, general and
individual, to grasp a sense by which all universalities are
particularized, given as such, but only in so far as the particular
occurs this way, but could always occur otherwise; the characteristics
of the particular are both being as it is, as it has occurred, but
neither are they all that could potentially occur. This balance, and
refusal of the general and the particular, one that allows for all the
potential unrealized forms of Being in so far as it embraces Being as
such, is what Agamben calls the ‘whatever singularity’. The
relinquishing of the author, or the hard object, or representation, or
technique, or retinality are all maneuvers through which a space is
cleared, or rather a milieu is opened, grasped and excavated within
which there is potential for something, the *whatever*, to occur within
– call it an ‘act’, an ‘event’ or a ‘singularity’. This potential to be
otherwise, or merely this *potential for potential*, is related but
antithetical to Foucault’s concept of governmental securisation in which
potential occurrences are speculated on and allowed for within a system
or plan that must be able to accommodate, respond to, neutralize or make
use of a spectrum of potential events. For the security state the event
is *pre*cuperated into a social and economic equilibrium; in the best
relational artworks, the event’s effects resist being put to work – they
may even resist being consciously identified or understood, and operate
more as a ‘stored code’, an unspent power with unknowable potential
future manifestations – a whatever singularity.

Returning to the problematic of the city in its neoliberal mode of
development – it is important to note the transition that occurred in
the 1980s from the process of ‘gentrification’ to the state-led
stimulation of ‘urban regeneration’. Gentrification is a term coined by
sociologist Ruth Glass in 1964 to describe the movement of affluent
individuals into lower class areas of the city. The state simulation of
this apparently ad hoc activity is what has been named ‘regeneration’. I
want to think about how this governmental simulation, or forced
stimulation of a process deemed natural, bears all the hallmarks of
neoliberalism’s schizophrenic need to posit the naturalness of the
market’s ordering of social and economic processes on the one hand,
while constantly needing to intervene to produce the correct conditions
within which ‘nature’ can take its course. Here we will consider the
role that creativity and public art is given in the production of a set
of conditions which not only apparently stimulate growth, but also
affect the behavior of subjects, of city dwellers, rendering them
compatible with the desired trajectory of growth, productivity, and
active social participation. How, in other words, the public display of
creativity helps valorize life within an economic and biopoltical
rationality. Part of this process of valorization is also, of course, to
pre-empt, drive out and mask over those subjects and behaviors that
cannot be put to use. In this sense, we can think about how
securitization extends to creativity – perhaps we can call this the
‘securitization of creativity’.

So, as noted, initially considered an ad hoc, *natural* phenomenon,
gentrification has increasingly been engineered by first local and now
global networks of real estate developers and speculators in step with
local governments. It should immediately be said that the outcome of
gentrification is usually one of increased property prices, increased
revenue to local governments from property taxes and the displacement of
lower income populations. The advent of ‘urban regeneration’ in the
early 1980s was largely a state-led response to the blighting of the
inner city in the wake of the twin phenomena of deindustrialization and
suburbanization.[^6] In the UK, it was also part of a governmental
response to a virulent wave of riots that erupted across Britain’s
streets in the summer of 1981, from London’s Brixton, Liverpool’s
Toxteth, Birmingham’s Handsworth, to Leeds’ Chapeltown. During this hot
summer, dispossessed populations vented their rage and contempt for a
system that treated them as surplus to requirement; both neglecting and
harassing them by turns. These riots – often cast as race riots – were
not only a response to high unemployment (or Thatcher’s planned
unemployment), biting poverty and the degenerating of housing stock, but
also the aggressive policing of the non-white working class population
who were subjected to discriminatory and heavy-handed policing, under
‘sus’ law – the police power to stop and search preemptively, purely on
the basis of suspicion. Poet, Levi Tafari put it this way:

Living inna Liverpool is living in hell look pon the places where we
have fe dwell them have we under a political spell bad housing
unemployment and the depression as well.[^7] (Tafari, L., 1989)

And how did the British state respond to the uprising and discontent of
significant pockets of its population? Then Secretary of the
Environment, Michael Heseltine, was dispatched around the country in a
helicopter, to consult with so-called community leaders. The outcome? A
series of ‘Garden Festivals’ around the UK, which offer an early model
of ‘cultural’ regeneration. These festivals combined the production of a
series of ornamental gardens with pop-cultural hagiography – in
Liverpool, for instance, the festival included a yellow submarine and a
statue of John Lennon. They were typically placed in derelict industrial
sites near to working class areas, and unlocked large tranches of public
money to clear sites, purify land, improve transport links and
eventually transfer land to private developers. At each of the Garden
Festival sites, special agencies such as the Merseyside Development
Corporation were established to attract private capital investment and
lead regeneration in areas undergoing post-industrial decline; these
QUANGOs were directly appointed by the minister and overrode local
authority planning controls – a measure which would pre-empt later
large-scale redevelopment projects of the ’90s and ’00s.

This mode of addressing social unrest and infrastructural decline
exhibits several characteristics of the biopolitical governmentality we
have been discussing. The decision to clear, purify and deregulate
public lands constitute a massive subsidy to the private sector which is
courted and effectively underwritten to take over the state’s previous
role of city development. (Soon after the festivals had ended, most of
the expensively treated land they occupied was sold off to developers –
an outcome that made the entire cultural experiment seem like mere
foreplay). This is a prime example of the schizophrenic genuflecting to
and artificial stimulation of market activity which is apparently better
able to regulate social and economic activity than the state. This is
also what David Harvey has termed the ‘entrepreneurial’ mode of
municipal government which no longer directly addresses the material and
social needs of inhabitants through the provision of services and the
planning, building and maintenance of infrastructure, but which instead
presents cities and city districts as attractive commodities whose
inhabitants provide ‘social and cultural capital’ – effectively, just
another business opportunity competing against others for inward
investment from portfolio capitalists. Cultural events and signature art
and architecture are of course key to this branding and selling of the
city – a familiar strategy which explains much of the state subsidized
public art bubble of the boom years.

Another key biopolitical characteristic witnessed in the response of the
Thatcher government to the misery and desperation of inner-city
populations is the use of the ‘state of exception’ witnessed through the
suspension of local planning laws within designated parts of the city.
Actions such as these expose the state’s ultimate externality to its own
laws which must, Foucault argues, be temporarily suspended in order to
attain the very ends of the state, namely its perpetuation. (We should
note, however, that Agamben sees the state of exception as having become
sovereignty’s permanent condition of operation within capitalism).[^8]
Quoting Chemnitz, the 17^th^ century political theorist, Foucault
describes the relationship of the state to its own laws thus:

In fact, raison d’Etat must command, not by ‘sticking to the laws,’ but,
if necessary, it must command ‘the laws themselves, which must adapt to
the present state of the republic’. So, the coup d’Etat does not break
with raison d’Etat. It is an element, an event, a way of doing things
that, as something that breaches the laws \[…\] falls entirely within
the general horizon, the general form of raison d’Etat.[^9]

The coup d’Etat itself must happen almost without the population
knowing, under the blanket of darkness and secrecy, presenting it with a
*fait accompli*. It is interesting to consider the role of culture as
part of the theatrical *mise-en-scene* that allows this micro-coup
d’Etat to occur. The yellow submarine blinds us from the real,
underlying economic exchanges.

A further biopolitically paradigmatic aspect of the Thatcher
government’s response was its attempt to intervene in the conditions of
life to produce effects of ‘happiness’ and ‘well-being’ as a way of
maintaining control and boosting the co-operation and productive
activity of its subjects. Speaking of the development of policing in the
17^th^ century, during the emergence of raison d’Etat, Foucault writes,

So with the police there is a circle that starts from the state as a
power of rational and calculated intervention on individuals and comes
back to the state as a growing set of forces, or forces to be developed,
passing through the life of individuals, which will now be precious to
the state simply as life.[^10]

He goes on to say that this circle will pass through more than just the
life of individuals, but through their ‘convenience’, their ‘amenity’,
something which amounts to ‘more than just living’ – all of which the
police were charged with ensuring through their surveillance, regulation
and control of the dense interactions between individuals, especially in
the towns and cities. This concern for the individual’s ‘better than
just living’ he writes,

Must in some way be drawn on and constituted into state utility: making
men’s happiness the state’s utility, making men’s happiness the very
strength of the state.[^11]

Although Foucault describes the police state as a 17^th^ century
phenomenon, something which recedes firstly within the ideology of
laissez-faire, and later neoliberalism’s apparent deregulatory activity,
I think it is clear that the conjunction of what we could call
population optimization, short-handed as the ‘nanny state’ and its
proliferating interventions into life, and the utilitarian deployment of
happiness, shorthanded as the culture industry, suggest that this
correlation of police work and the manufacture of happiness hasn’t
disappeared but only shifted form. The roll out of an alternating
sequence of either mega-sculptures (Gormley’s *Angel of the North*,
Wallinger’s proposed *White Horse* at Ebbsfleet, and Kapoor’s
*ArcelorMittal Orbit* tower for the Olympic site), or relational and
ephemeral urban interventions, reveals something of the uneasy marriage
of agendas that conspire around public art to help deliver the effects
of happiness the state so badly needs to gain the acquiescence and
self-regulation of subjects within the context of large-scale urban
change.

It is precisely this conjunction of happiness and control that
philosopher Maria Muhle wants to emphasize through her rejection of
those characterizations of biopower that cast it as an aggressive
take-over of life. Instead, she argues, it is a modality that possesses
a positive and not merely repressive relation to life. ‘My claim’, she
writes, ‘is that biopolitics is defined by the fact that rather than
merely relating to life, it takes on the way life itself functions; that
it functions like life in order to be better able to regulate it.’[^12]
So there are positive and pleasurable aspects to the governmental
subsumption of life – its life-like activity – that relate to art’s
desire to be more like-life and less like the moribund objects within
the museum. Indeed, the production of this ‘positive’ relation, often
entails the deployment of art for governmental and economic ends – as
has been amply demonstrated by the paradigm of the Creative City. The
general aestheticisation of urban spaces certainly helps mark off the
disciplinary city of factory work from the securitized city of
immaterial production and consumption. The pain, filth and graft of
production is increasingly purged from our cities (or at least from
view), and with it the workers who performed this graft. In its place
comes the illusion of our general conversion to a pleasurable,
weightless form of production, and the accompanying figure of what in
German is called the ‘Bummler’, the ambler, the Bourgeois enjoyer of the
city as a playground rich in cultural and retail diversions. No longer
the austere streets of factory towns, but the slick and virtualized
pedestrian zones of creative quarters, in which people’s happiness is
catered to, life is deemed ‘more than just lived’, and art contributes
invaluably to a cultivation and passification of public space. But it is
not just the use of art for the production of happiness effects and
place branding, I would argue, that creates discomfort for the more
conscious practitioners, but the sharing of certain characteristics by
aesthetic and governmental regimes. Beyond a shared orientation towards
the event and the milieu – complex fields of interrelation between life,
activity and environment which entail a speculative approach to
potential effects – there are other key ‘regulatory ideas’ operative in
both realms, namely the concepts of ‘engagement’ and ‘openness’.

In a recent interview about making art in the context of regeneration
with the artist Alberto Duman, we discussed how the ‘hard object’ had
been relegated in public art practice over the last decade or so.[^13]
He drew attention to how the sculptural tradition in public art has
given way to ‘a situation where everything but the object is the way to
do public art’, the normativity of which he finds disturbing. According
to art historian Miwon Kwon, in her book *One Place After Another*, this
normative switchover came with the critical reception of the public art
exhibition Culture in Action, curated by Jane Jacob, in Chicago in 1993.
It is worth quoting the curator’s assessment of the trajectory from the
site-specific object to the community-oriented public artwork to be
reminded of how this development was unequivocally linked to progressive
social effects, and actively delinked from the development agendas we
now see harnessing it. She writes,

As public art shifted away from large-scale objects, to physically or
conceptually site specific projects, to audience specific concerns (work
made in response to those who occupy a given site), it moved from an
aesthetic function, to a design function, to a social function. Rather
than serving to promote the economic development of American cities, as
did public art beginning in the late 1960s, it is now being viewed as a
means of stabilizing community development through urban centers. In the
1990s the role of public art has shifted from that of renewing the
physical environment to that of improving society, from promoting
aesthetic quality to contributing to the quality of life, from enriching
lives to saving lives.[^14]

What is interesting here is not only how she counters socially-oriented
public art to economic development, but also how governmental her
language sounds when she sites the objectives of this kind of work:
‘stabilizing community development’ and ‘improving society’ and
‘improving the quality of life’, not to mention the extraordinary
grandiosity of her claim that art can save lives. Running through this
equation of art’s social orientation with ameliorating social effects is
the implicit idea that the art can serve to activate members of the
‘community,’ to ‘engage’ them in constructive dialogues, to alter their
behavior. This conception of activated spectatorship, and its coupling
to the blurring of art and life, presents a crucial isomorphism between
aesthetics and the self-management of the subject that biopolitical
info-capitalism attempts to stage. Present here is also a kind of crass
identification between notions of engaged spectatorship and a
literalisation of activity that attempts to draw out aesthetic
contemplation into immediate behavioral and social effects. In his book
*The Emancipated Spectator*, Rancière exposes what he considers the
cul-de-sac of avant-garde notions of activating the audience, from
Brecht to Debord, for the imposition, finally, of a prescriptive and
‘sovereign’ notion of what counts as activity onto an audience
contemptuously imagined as unrelentingly passive, as victims of the
spectacle. Speaking of the wish to abolish the separation of active
performers from passive spectators, or between the spaces of art and
everyday life, in avant-garde theatre he says,

But the redistribution of places is one thing; the requirement that
theatre assign itself the goal of assembling a community which ends the
separation of the spectacle is quite another. The first involves the
invention of new intellectual adventures, the second a new form of
allocating bodies to their rightful place, which, in the event, is their
place of communion.[^15]

Rejecting the self-imposed necessity of theatre to literalize the
‘community’ of spectators occupying the theatre at any one time,
Rancière argues that, to the contrary,

In a theatre, in front of a performance, just as in a museum, school or
street, there are only ever individuals plotting their own paths in the
forest of things, acts and signs that confront or surround them.[^16]

Art, he is arguing need not and should not strive to create a
collectivity of its spectators. Art that attempts this fails to
recognize the capacity that has always already joined people across
boundaries, namely, the ‘shared power of the equality of intelligence’
which ‘makes them exchange their intellectual adventures, in so far as
it keeps them separate from one another, equally capable of using the
power everyone has to plot her own path.’[^17] It is easy to see the
potential overlaps between the community creating desires of
avant-gardism which neglect the singularity of the viewer’s experience
and thought, and the desire of the New Labour government to create a
stakeholder society, a series of communities in which a place and
activity is allocated to each and every one, but which takes no soul
into account.

I think Anthony Gormley’s public art exemplifies the stakes of this
institutional take-over of engagement and participation – we see its
machinations whirring around most nakedly in his 2009 work for Trafalgar
Square’s fourth column titled, *One and Other*. This piece entailed the
rotation of a volunteer living occupant of the plinth on an hourly
basis; an occupation which was filmed and archived on its associated
website. In a grotesque bureaucratic aping of avant-garde notions of the
audience’s co-production of the work, the volunteer needed to obtain the
right to participate by applying, via a website, and having their
intended action vetted in advance before being given a time slot. The
performances, by and large, became a theatre of civil society
initiatives, exaggerated presentations of identity and narcissistic
exhibitionism. This work, it seems to me, operates according to the
Agambanian logic of ‘inclusive exclusion’, a logic that uses the very
act of inclusion as a means to exclude subjects from the scene of the
political or the aesthetic. The artwork becomes a microcosm of the
inclusive exclusion of the democratic process itself; participants, like
voters, are fairly and evenly, if impersonally and bureaucratically
treated, given a voice within the narrowly constructed terms of a
permissible utterance and, in so doing, denied the ability to be heard,
act collectively or engage in any ‘act’ that might rupture the normal
functioning of things. They are effectively engaged in order to be
neutralized, in the interests of the self-perpetuation of the state or
the state-like power of Gormley’s signature branding of high-profile
public space.

This stake of institutionalized engagement – its logic of inclusive
exclusion – is often discussed by artists who have worked within the
context of regeneration as a tactic of ‘soft policing’ performed on
those populations who will be most dramatically affected by development.
Alberto Duman has described the consultative work of public artists in
regeneration or ‘social conflict zones’ as that of appeasement. He says,
‘The artist, very often is called in with a fairly backward idea that
art has the capacity to negotiate, be a meeting place, art is a space
where differences are negotiated because it can transcend the specifics
of the situation, of time and space.’[^18] And yet, he is keen to point
out, this negotiating capacity of art is wielded from one side, namely
by those who are driving the process of regeneration. As with the Big
Society, public engagement is solicited just at the moment when the
conditions which nurture and sustain community are being dismantled,
through the generalized enclosures and sell-offs of public assets, the
privatization and shrinkage of public services and the ‘social
cleansing’ of non-productive life from the inner city. Far from ‘saving
lives’, socially-oriented artworks such as Gormley’s often provide the
image of what Boris Groys has called the regime of ‘aesthetic equal
rights’ as a cover for the reduction of the working class population’s
rights of access to the means of subsistence.

With a sharp sense of this double-sided, or as he calls it ‘two-faced’,
character of much participatory public art, Duman submitted a highly
sarcastic proposal to the Spitalfields Sculpture Prize in 2009. The
sculpture was intended to be sited in the conflict zone of a relatively
new corporate plaza that had been laid over the now demolished site of
one half of Spitalfields Market in East London. The prize is funded by
Hammerson, the developers behind the commercial development of the area
over the last 15 years. Playing a ‘two-faced’ game himself, Duman
submitted plans for a giant, 10m high ‘Cleaning in Progress’ sign that
would be both eye-catching, amusing and provide shelter for shoppers and
amblers from the elements. Of course the sting in the tail of this
apparently innocuous object was that the cleaning it makes reference to
is both social and literal; it commemorates those who have been purged
from the area in order to make way for the high real estate and rental
values it can now command, and flags up the relegation of those working
class occupants who remain to the ancillary role of cleaners and service
workers; the ghosts who maintain the space but for whom it isn’t
intended. The giant sign acts in solidarity with these ghosts who haunt
and preserve the spaces of pleasure and consumption, whilst allowing the
new occupants to shelter under its protective mantle.

For Boris Groys, avant-garde art’s development of a regime of ‘equal
aesthetic rights’ hinges on the idea, linked to the blurring of art and
life, that the classical avant-garde ‘has struggled to achieve
recognition of all signs, forms, and things as legitimate objects of
artistic desire and, hence, also as legitimate objects of representation
in art.’[^19] He sees a parallel between the aesthetic struggle for
recognition, and the political struggle for the recognition and
inclusion of all minorities. Within art, however, the thought that
anything can potentially be recognized as art potentially leads to an
entropic game where each artwork appears to be simply an arbitrary and
unnecessary extension or iteration of this field of equal rights.
However, he argues, art today ‘operates in the gap between the formal
equality of all art forms and their factual inequality.’[^20] So, while
recognizing the potential legitimacy of anything as art, in reality not
everything is considered as such and admitted into the museum or the
canon. ‘The good artwork’, he continues, ‘is precisely that work which
affirms the formal equality of all images under the conditions of their
factual inequality. This gesture is always contextual and historically
specific, but it also has paradigmatic importance as a model for further
repetition of the gesture.’[^21] I think Duman’s work strikes just such
a balance, elevating the readymade plastic sign to a higher power which
implies the potential elevation of any profane object, whilst mobilizing
this banal object to signify the factual exclusion of former inhabitants
who become the ‘revenants’ of this apparent space of open, democratic
enjoyment. Put another way, the participation of the banal object in the
aesthetic regime of equal rights becomes a cipher for the factual
impossibility of participation within a wider regime of participatory
aesthetics.

Earlier I mentioned that ‘openness’ was another regulatory idea that
intersects governmental, economic and aesthetic terrains. As with the
regime of equal aesthetic rights, the principle of openness can also
happily co-exist with and co-produce factual inequalities and closed or
proprietary systems. We see this everywhere from the deployment of the
open standards of the web, such as HTML and HTTP to run proprietary
software or for private profit, to the double standards of free market
capitalism where developing countries are compelled to open up their
markets and allow inward investment while economic giants like the US
are able to maintain trade barriers and subsidies for domestic
production. Openness itself is a kind of conceptual medium along which,
as chairman for the US Business Committee for the Arts in the 80s Winton
Blount once said, business can also travel. Fighting trade regulations,
taxation and overt government control was not just a civic duty, he
argued, but a means of keeping ‘open those avenues of freedom along
which art and commerce both travel.’[^22]

Roman Vasseur, Lead Artist appointed to oversee the redevelopment of
Harlow New Town, has argued, this reversibility of openness can also
extend to who might be considered an artist in the context of
creative-led regeneration. ‘One can envisage a future’ he says, ‘where
artists, or individuals with an extensive training in the visual arts
and art history will be slowly moved out of this new economy in favor of
“creatives” able to privilege deliverability and consultation over other
concerns.’[^23] It is worth considering how the energies that drive the
privileging of openness as an aesthetic, technical, economic and social
form waver between the political horizon of inclusion and the degraded,
flattening equivalence of the value form. This has the interesting
effect of driving the Beuysian claim that ‘everyone is an artist’ in at
least two directions at once: the death of the author also presides over
the birth of the professionalized creative. What this final example
reveals is the extent to which governmental and economic calculation and
the social engineering of happiness can move along similar trajectories
as the life-oriented activities of art. But in keeping with Groys’
remarks about the good artwork, the artistic attempt to promote a life
which is ‘more than just lived’ cannot take place under the monocultural
regime of human capital, or under the logic of biopolitical happiness,
if it does not draw attention to the way biopolitical capitalism
mobilizes individuals to create optimum effects within its own paradigm
of population optimization. The good artwork that aims to act upon life
takes into account the more radical horizons of openness, event, act,
milieu, engagement and participation, admitting as much to the factual
absence of these realities as to the potential for their potential in a
wholly unspecified future form.

### Reference List

Agamben, Giorgio. *Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life*, Stanford
University Press, 1998.

Foucault, Michel. *Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the
Collège de France 1977-1978*, Picador - Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.

Groys, Boris. Equal Aesthetic Rights, in *Art Power*, MIT, 2008.

Kwon, Miwon. *One Place After Another: Site Specific Art and Locational
Identity*, MIT Press, 2004.

Muhle, Maria Maria in 'Qu-est-ce Que la Biopolitique?' A Conversation on
Theories of Biopolitics between Thomas Lemke and Maria Muhle, moderated
by André Rottman, *Texte Zur Kunst*, 73 (March 2009), p. 136.

Rancière, Jacques. *The Emancipated Spectator*, Verso, 2011.

Slater, Josephine Berry & Iles, Anthony. *No Room to Move: Radical Art
and the Regenerate City*, Mute Books, 2010.

[^1]: Michel Foucault, Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the
    Collège de France 1977-1978, Picador / Palgrave Macmillan, 2007,
    p.14.

[^2]: Ibid., p.20.

[^3]: Ibid.

[^4]: Ibid., p.21.

[^5]: Ibid., p.346.

[^6]: For a longer development of these arguments and history see,
    Josephine Berry Slater & Anthony Iles, *No Room to Move: Radical Art
    and the Regenerate City*, Mute Books, 2010

[^7]: L. Tafari (1989).

[^8]: Cf Giorgio Agamben, Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life,
    Stanford University Press, 1998.

[^9]: Ibid., pp. 261-262

[^10]: Ibid., p.327.

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: Maria Muhle in ‘Qu-est-ce Que la Biopolitique?: A Conversation on
    Theories of Biopolitics between Thomas Lemke and Maria Muhle,
    moderated by André Rottman’, Texte Zur Kunst, 73 (March, 2009),
    p.136.

[^13]: Cf ‘Interview with Alberto Duman’, in No Room to Move, op. cit.,
    pp.58-79.

[^14]: Jane Jacob, cited in Miwon Kwon, One Place After Another: Site
    Specific Art and Locational Identity, MIT Press, 2004, p.111.

[^15]: Jacques Rancière, The Emancipated Spectator, Verso, 2011, p.15.

[^16]: Ibid.

[^17]: Ibid., p.17.

[^18]: Alberto Duman, in No Room to Move, op. cit.

[^19]: Boris Groys, ‘Equal Aesthetic Rights’, in Art Power, MIT
    (2008):14.

[^20]: Ibid., p.16.

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Cited in Chin-tao Wu, 'Embracing the Enterprise Culture’, New
    Left Review 230 (1998): 30.

[^23]: Roman Vasseur in ‘Interview with Roman Vasseur’, in No Room to
    Move, p.114.


Marc James Léger

## THE AGENCY OF ART IN THE UNCONSCIOUS

How can we explain the grey zone, the minimum distance between
creativity and capitalist demand? How can we understand creative
autonomy and resistance in the context of renewed expectations for art
to have a direct social and political utility? What can psychoanalysis
contribute to art criticism as it relates to the field of politicized
visual art, now more commonly referred to as socially engaged art? What
does the notion of the avant garde mean for cultural production in a
world of networked connectivity, participatory ideology and creative
industry dispossession? According to Slavoj Žižek, when art production
is increasingly subjected to commodification, and when commodities are
increasingly aestheticized, artworks are no longer able to sustain the
lack in the big Other, understood here as the agency of belief in art’s
social and cultural significance.[^1] One symptom of this phenomenon is
the view that art today has collapsed directly into political economy.
In the words of the editors of *e-flux* journal, “contemporary art *is*
neoliberalism in its most purified form”.[^2] The truth of this
assertion is that artworks are particularly apt as signifiers of
castration. As creativity marks ever more aspects of daily life, almost
any kind of work not only can, but in a kind of frenetic hysteria, must
be elevated to the place of Art.[^3] While this may seem a standard
postmodern argument for the breakdown of the distinction between high
art and mass culture, postmodernism tends nevertheless to leave belief
in the aesthetic intact, proliferating through the fields of discourse
it comes into contact with. In the following, I argue against postmodern
relativism, however, and wish to consider instead, to paraphrase Žižek
in his thinking on Christianity, “the perverse core” of avant-garde art
production.

### Art for Imbeciles

In an essay on what he calls “enclave theory,” John Roberts made the
somewhat startling assertion that many of the most progressive art
theories of recent years, those attributed to Nicolas Bourriaud, Gregory
Sholette, Grant Kester, Stephen Wright, and even theorists like Jean-Luc
Nancy, Alain Badiou, Slavoj Žižek, Bruno Bosteels, Felix Guattari, Toni
Negri and Michael Hardt, represent the “invariant core of a communist
programme” that is “largely divorced from the past,” in particular, from
its Stalinist Communist party organizations, and is committed rather to
“culturally aestheticized” “autonomous forms of productive, intellectual
and creative community”.[^4] What is surprising in this claim is the
idea that these are invariant forms, and not significantly different.
Roberts asks us to consider what all of these theorists’ perspectives on
radical culture have in common rather than what distinguishes them. This
gesture might not be such a bad way to understand the so-called “crisis”
of art and art criticism in a world of cultural corporatization and
neoliberal engineering of creative capital. Whatever contemporary art’s
failings in terms of pursuing revolutionary class struggle, it
represents, according to Roberts, a kind of leftist bloc against what
Gregory Sholette terms enterprise culture. Perhaps one of the most
acerbic depictions of the art world as a rigged system of economic and
social exploitation is Bruce Barber’s 2008 drawing titled *Artworld
Ponzi Scheme*, which shows a pyramid comprised of payers, prayers and
players, all of them trapped within a hierarchically inegalitarian
system. The intrigue in this drawing, especially as it comes after the
biggest financial debacle since the 1970s, is that the currency of art
is premised on false claims, or even “toxic assets.”

Fig. Bruce Barber, *Artworld Ponzi Scheme*, drawing, 2008. Courtesy of
the artist.

The idea that art has no socially agreed upon justifications has been
addressed by anthropologist David Graeber, who wonders why contemporary
theorists attending an art symposium at the Tate Museum should explain
the 2008 fiasco by taking recourse to avant-garde art created between
1916 and 1922.[^5] His point is that we are potentially once again
living a revolutionary moment, but that epistemological subversion
through culture and post-structuralist theory seems to satisfy only
liberal academics. The return to avant-gardism, he argues, effects “a
subtle form of conservatism – or, perhaps one should say conservative
radicalism, if such were possible – a nostalgia for the days when it was
possible to put on a tin-foil suit, shout nonsense verse, and watch
staid bourgeois audiences turn into outraged lynch mobs.” These days are
gone, he argues, replaced by the immaterial labor and service economy
analysis of people like Maurizio Lazzarato and Toni Negri. The art of
the rich, he goes on, has more to do with the analysis of products than
of social processes, floating above the mire of ordinary existence. Art
today appears to contemporary political philosophers to belong to the
immaterial domain, a fact that exacerbates its condition of crisis. The
art world, for Graeber, is the apparatus of people who manage this
crisis. Unable to define the category of art in any way that is adequate
beyond its quality as something that only rich people and museums can
afford to buy, the art world cannot establish its own legitimacy.
Graeber then argues that the essence of politics in social life is to
make people believe. Things become true if you can convince enough
people to believe them. In order to play the game effectively, one must
not oneself know the essence of things. He concludes from this that if
the art world was to recognize itself as a form of politics, it would
also need to “recognize itself as something both magical, and a
confidence game – a kind of scam”.[^6] Insofar as the art world has
become an appendage to financial capital, fictive capital explains
fictive cultural value as well. All the players, he argues, cynics and
idealists alike, draw on outmoded nineteenth-century notions of art,
even those who create “enclaves” where they can experiment with new
forms of life.

Where Graeber gets at the issue is when he later argues that for all of
the fictionalization that takes place across the social field, the
magically created value of art is no less real. This assertion confirms
the Lacanian emphasis on the reality of illusion, which contrasts to
transgressions that merely try to escape the Real. In this regard, Žižek
agrees with Badiou, who argues that art is a medium of truth. This also
relates to the Marxist understanding of commodity fetishism, which
states that even if capitalists understand that workers produce the
value of their merchandise, they nevertheless continue to believe in the
miracle of exchange. The famous Žižekian example, of course, is the
anecdote about Niels Bohr, who when asked if he believed in the good
luck derived from a horse shoe, replied he did not, but that apparently
it works even if one does not believe in it. Rather than payer, player
and prayer, then, categories that Barber leaves undefined, I would like
to propose the set of three subject positions that Žižek outlines at the
start of *Less Than Nothing*: the idiot, the moron and the imbecile.[^7]
All three positions are premised on the Lacanian theory of the big
Other, which stands for the heterogeneous social rules that together
comprise what Lacan defines as the social symbolic. As an impersonal
social agency, the big Other stands in for those rules that shape the
unconscious of the social subject.

The first of the three is the idiot, defined by Žižek as someone who is
“too intelligent to process implicit social rules”.[^8] The idiot
imagines himself beyond the influence of the big Other and knows the
rules (of art) all too well to be able to process them in a way beyond
his hyper-intellectuality. As the first of two examples of idiots within
contemporary art theory, both colleagues of mine, we have Gregory
Sholette and his concept of “dark matter.” According to Sholette, dark
matter describes the “shadowy social productivity” that haunts the high
art world. The great many excluded practices and failed artists who keep
the world of galleries, collections, and magazines going, Sholette
argues, are today threatening this pyramidal system as their dark energy
becomes increasingly visible. The book *Dark Matter* thus presents
itself as a “lumpenography” of this invisible mass of makeshift,
amateur, informal, unofficial, autonomous, activist, non-institutional,
and self-organized practices.[^9] Sholette argues that art critics, art
historians, arts administrators, collectors and dealers typically have
little interest in creative dark matter. There is no question that the
art world is made up not only of what is known about art, but involves a
complex division of labor and specialized tasks that work to keep a
multi-billion-dollar industry operating for the benefit of a minority of
high profile artists. This system keeps the vast majority of
professionally trained artists in a state of subservience and
underdevelopment. The first and most general question that is asked by
Sholette is what would happen if this superfluous majority went on
permanent strike and gave up on the art system’s means of legitimation.
Contemporary high art is thoroughly connected, he says, to Art Inc. and
does not hide its profit motivations. It is only those dark practices at
the margins that still hold on to this former (avant-garde) task of art
to challenge commercial goals. While Sholette does appreciate the labor
theory of value, he suspends the understanding that most forms of
culture are non-productive and rather dependent in complex ways on
profits collected elsewhere in the proletarianized global marketplace.
Bourdieu’s sociology of art, in contrast, benefited from its use of the
concept of social totality. The absence of the use of the concept of
totality in Sholette’s book prevents him from offering a class analysis
of culture that would go beyond redistributive justice. Also, dark
matter seems to share very little common ground with the avant-garde
tradition of revolutionary art, whose distinct purpose is to represent
the social function of art in class society. As Žižek has argued, an
ideological identification exerts the greatest pressure on us when we
fool ourselves into believing we are not fully identical to it. The
epistemological crisis in the arts that is mentioned in Sholette’s
introduction to *Dark Matter* should therefore not be thought to
directly reflect the crisis in global capital, though the connections
between these spheres do indeed need to be drawn.

A second idiot in this set is Brian Holmes and his theory of “liar’s
poker.” Holmes is one of the sharpest analysts of artistic resistance
within societies of control and is also, like so many contemporary
theorists, skeptical of avant-garde modes of contestation. Within the
new flexible regimes of accumulation and casual freelance culture, the
demands for autonomy, he argues, are diverted into new modes of
control.[^10] The premise of liar’s poker, as he puts it, is that “when
people talk about politics in an artistic frame, they’re lying”.[^11]
Cultural institutions, he argues, constantly demand that artists
“picture politics,” playing the art game and representing those who are
excluded to those who are safely nestled inside, especially
transnational corporations, who then support the realm of art as a
sphere that is separate from abstract financial decisions. Anti-art
artists who work directly in the public sphere or on the terrain of
everyday life, or within new technological and scientific landscapes,
only pretend to leave behind the artistic frame. In reality they collude
with curators and directors to show images of political reality. Because
the latter are averse to such realism, the artist has to bluff their way
through. Holmes assumes, however, that an artist involved with a social
movement is an artist that has successfully challenged the guilt
relations of the art system. Because of this he is deeply suspicious of
the function of belief, which, he argues, is a powerful or interesting
fetish, an illusion that gets players caught in the game rather than
directly confronting power, as in the case of artworks that deepen the
links between art activism and social movements. What distinguishes
Holmes from Žižek, however, is that he does not ask us to believe even
more in art and to directly assume the lack in the big Other – a small
distinction, but a crucial one if we are to see art institutions as
anything more than duplicitous. Like Sholette, Holmes is concerned that
institutions seek cultural capital among “the more radical fractions of
the artistic field”.[^12] The artist has to produce the ace of politics,
he argues, while proving all the while that the ace is merely a joker,
thereby undermining the reality of the illusion. Like so many leftists,
Holmes assumes that the big Other is or can be occupied.

The second subject position outlined by Žižek is the moron, defined by
“the stupidity of those who fully identify with common sense, who fully
stand for the big Other of appearances”.[^13] Two notable cultural
theorists who might in some ways fill this description are Grant Kester
and Claire Bishop. Kester is a seasoned art critic with a long track
record of insightful writing on the shift from public art and identity
politics in the 1980s and 90s to the new phenomenon of community art in
the 90s and 2000s. The type of site-specific collaborative work that he
champions unfolds, he says, through an extended interaction with local
communities. Like many proponents of the new tendencies, he has worked
to anchor his theory of “dialogical aesthetics” in both social and
political history as well as the philosophy of aesthetics. While erudite
and knowledgeable, Kester’s polemic, as presented in his book *The One
and the Many*, is intensely prescriptive.[^14] For the sake of artist
groups like Park Fiction, Ala Plastica, and Dialogue, all avant-garde
tactics (reduced to formalist modernism) are proscribed, including the
work of leading cultural theorists like Barthes, Derrida, de Certeau,
Lyotard, Kristeva, Blanchot, Badiou, Deleuze and Guattari, Agamben,
Nancy, Levinas, and Rancière – anyone associated with the post-May 68
generation of postmodern pessimism and who programmatically guard
against premature totalizations. “We are witnessing today,” he writes,
“a certain disenchantment with the existing parameters of avant-garde
art and an attempt to rearticulate the specificity of the aesthetic in
relationship to both the viewer and to other cultural and political
practices”.[^15] The leitmotif of avant-garde and theoretical
post-structuralism, he argues, is the impossibility of social
cohesion.[^16] In contrast, Kester is interested in the global
phenomenon and success of collaborative modes of production, as found
for instance in the work of Border Arts Workshop, Group Material,
REPOhistory, Gran Fury, Platform, WochenKlausur, and Groupo Etcetera,
where emphasis is placed on multiple authorship, participatory relation
to audience, and process-based activist intervention.[^17] Despite his
critique of what he calls the “intellectual baroque,” Kester’s
dialogical aesthetics retains many of the typical leitmotifs of
postmodernism, especially the distinctions that are made between
pluralism and an older avant-garde notion of culture that retained some
links to the class politics of socialism. With globalization, I would
argue, social forms have channeled culture in such a way as to give it a
privileged role in economic development. According to George Yúdice,
culture is today treated as an expedient, construed as a resource for
sociopolitical ameliorism and job creation, a process that coincides
with capitalist ideology and biopolitical regulation.[^18] The role of
culture, Yúdice argues, “has expanded in an unprecedented way into the
political and economic at the same time that conventional notions of
culture have been emptied out”.[^19] Unlike Sholette and Holmes, Kester
tends to underplay this problem of institutional mediation, leaving
actually existing institutions all the more operative in the
administration of socially engaged art.

Another critic we could add to the group of morons is Claire Bishop.
Bishop is well-known for her 2004 *October* essay in which she
criticized Bourriaud’s relational aesthetics for its rhetoric of
democracy and emancipation.[^20] The open works advocated by
contemporary critics like Bourriaud foreground interaction rather than
contemplation and engagement rather than passivity and disengagement,
assuming that these former modalities are inherently political and
emancipatory. She argues that Bourriaud wants to equate aesthetic
judgement with political judgement. “But how,” she asks, “do we measure
or compare these relationships?”.[^21] Dialogue, she says, is assumed in
advance to be democratic, excluding other modalities, like autonomy,
antagonism, oppositionality, destabilization, and artworks that
recognize the limits of “society’s ability to fully constitute
itself”.[^22] She defines the autonomy of the artwork in terms of the
social antagonism that is mirrored in the tension between art and
society. Bishop insists that we should be better able to judge art
itself and not merely better politics, and therefore acknowledge the
limits of what art can do. One of the problems here is the return to the
function of criticism and the assumption that art, by itself, can be the
object of objective assessment. In this gesture Bishop obviates the
notion of antagonism that she otherwise recognizes. While she exposes
what is repressed in the idea of social harmony, she ignores how art
itself acts as this agent of repression. In this regard, *Artificial
Hells*, her latest treatment of participatory art, mostly expands the
number of examples rather than improve the initial theory.[^23] She
worries about the instrumentalization of participatory art, something
Kester is less troubled by, but perhaps misses the point that this
apprehension is misplaced insofar as it concerns itself with art *per
se* and art criticism as a means of institutional legitimation (perhaps
to satisfy critics like Graeber). She very correctly recognizes that the
new European cultural policies enacted under *New Labour* in the U.K.
are a form of social engineering but fails to produce a theory that
addresses how and why art eludes such institutionalization.

I would argue, in contrast, that it is quite possible for an artwork to
be valid as an autonomous and critical work and at the same time to defy
institutional capture, and this, without denying the incompleteness of
the social. For me to say this, I should think that I belong to the
third group in Žižek’s series: the imbeciles. An imbecile is someone
whose mental retardation causes him to be aware of the need for a big
Other, but who does not rely on it. The imbecile is somewhere between
the idiot and the moron, who recognizes the function of language but who
distrusts it.[^24] The big Other exists, but is inconsistent. The
question for aesthetics, then, is to consider in theoretical and not
only sociological terms the ways in which the art world guarantees the
consistency of the rules of art, allowing for dark matter to be
distinguished from consecrated artists. What unites the idiot, the moron
and the imbecile is the inconsistency of their belief in the big Other
of art and, as I argue further on, this inconsistency represents the
“perverse core” of aesthetics as such.

### The Reality of the Fiction

What is the significance of critical art in the context of contemporary
cultural theory, within the space of culture in general, and as it is
being reengineered to conform ever more tightly with the needs of
accumulation – leading many to presume that avant-garde artworks and
films have been made obsolete by new social relations and by the new
regimes of production? Here I would like to pursue the path of the
imbecile with reference to Žižek’s chapter on Christianity in the
opening “Drink Before” section of *Less Than Nothing*. The trick is to
not reduce theory to empiricism and to focus on the negative energy of
art rather than the positivity of the social causes that artists are
being increasingly expected to deal with directly. While I do not agree
with those who argue that art and reparative social work or political
propaganda are inherently separate activities, I do think that socially
engaged art benefits from some aesthetic theorizing that goes beyond
German idealism.

Žižek’s attention to Hegel in *Less Than Nothing* is largely due to the
overlap with Lacan and Žižek’s view that among the German idealists,
Hegel alone is able to sustain the idea of the lack in the big Other and
the dialectical reversal that occurs when an epistemological obstacle is
transposed directly into the Thing itself – here the work of art.[^25]
“Our inability to know the thing indicates a crack in the thing itself,
so that our very failure to reach the full truth is the indicator of
truth”.[^26] No wonder then that dark matter, to take up the metaphor,
is obviated by the obsession with the celebrity star system: Picasso,
Van Gogh, Ai Weiwei, Gerhard Richter, Jeff Koons, what have you. One
problem in the structure of ideology, Žižek explains, is that there is
no public, no symbolic agency that is there to register or witness the
disasters of capitalism. What is missing is the big Other, the space of
symbolic inscription and ideological suture. In contrast to Claire
Bishop’s quest to determine institutional criteria for judging
participatory art, Žižek writes:

Schoenberg still hoped that somewhere there would be at least one
listener who would truly understand his atonal music. It was only his
greatest pupil, Anton Webern, who accepted the fact that there is no
listener, no big Other to receive the work and properly recognize its
value.[^27]

There are no guarantees for art and this becomes one of the principal
axioms of the notion of creativity. Those who worry that all creativity
is today harnessed by capital miss an important point: the form of
illusory appearance remains on the surface of things and is thus closer
to the Real than historical reality itself. The concern of political
moralists and reformists is often to escape from the Real of illusion
through some kind of transgression that seeks to show the true,
so-called “phenomenal” reality, usually by pointing to some token of
reality: bodily affect, group interaction, S&P indicators, the haptic
qualities of new media, etc. The idea that art criticism should be more
global in scope, representing a greater diversity of experiences, is one
way among many to avoid the Real of illusion.[^28] What then can
artworks tell us about the changing parameters of what Peter Bürger
defined as the “institution art”?[^29]

The unique quality of art is that more than most other things in our
social universe it can express the reality of illusion through any
random object. This illusory quality is a secret, in Marx the commodity
fetish, or in Lacan, the ineffable *objet a* that allows anything to be
elevated to the concept of Art and allows it to be installed in the
symbolic order. The artist comes closest to this understanding when he
or she intervenes through the neutral position of the analyst.[^30] The
artist’s neutrality cannot be socially localized since the art thing has
no ontological reality but is a virtual point. This is what Lacan refers
to in the notion of *le père ou le pire* – the oedipal father or the
worse, the choice of art as the worse option, which more effectively
undermines the entire symbolic field. Avant-garde works represent a
negative force against the organic unity of community and as such are
vital to emancipatory politics.[^31] Strict egalitarian emancipation
cancels rather than preserves the organic unity of the hierarchical
social order. Radical art operates as the obscene disavowed underside of
the art world ponzi scheme. How so?

Almost every artwork preserves some aspect of the idea of art as a
reserve, or background against which we can measure deviations. Art’s
non-art status is therefore inscribed into the idea of Art – something
that Duchamp was perhaps the first artist to expound. Art is deeply
atheistic, to put things in terms of belief, and perversion is at the
core of the aesthetic. The obsession with the ineffable big Other is
sublated into acts of creation, something that Lacan defines as drive.
Creativity can therefore be defined as the eruption of a new form that
reorganizes the social field, imposing itself as a new necessity through
an act of ungrounded subjective decision, abandoned by Art and with no
guarantee of aesthetic value or art world consecration.[^32] The
inscrutability of the aesthetic big Other, even as blue chip investment,
is the certitude of creativity, the condition of its ecstatic
production. Since art is dead and the author is dead and since therefore
the function of the critic is nullified, art making and art judgments
are sacrificed to a pure Otherness of subjective destitution.

Art making is a scandal that undermines art from within. Such work has a
tragic self-effacing quality that socially engaged art sometimes refuses
in its resentment and narcissistic hatred of the “no” of Art. It
denounces art in favor of ethics but it does so through the disavowal of
the love of art. It proffers the socially networked artist as the better
of the avant-garde artist but it is the latter who properly betrays the
extorsion of creativity. The revolutionary artist acts unconditionally
and therefore comes closest to art’s expression of freedom and
emancipation, insisting, much like Antigone, on symbolic demand. The
creative artist is consequently excluded from the community of humans.

Holmes’ notion of “liar’s poker” can be explained as the insistence on
aesthetic sublimation rather than the insistence on the refusal of
co-optation; it implies an awareness of the monstrosity of the game
since the game is not only fixed in the symbolic order, but more
radically, since through his or her act the artist believes in the game
more than s/he is aware. The artist acts as though he or she is not
aware of capitalist recuperation, observing the appearances, the
virtuality of the illusion of the real. In the case of Barber’s pyramid,
the ‘prayer’ in the set represents a transitive function; he or she does
not have to believe since belief is presupposed by the artwork as
virtual entity. No wonder then that so many artists today are attempting
to go beyond the making of objects, taking social interaction itself as
the direct instantiation of art. This becomes possible due to the
perverse core of art and is an indication of the transitivity of belief.
The paradox, however, is that if we take away whatever stands in for
belief, we lose the reality of the illusion and so any claim to
emancipation through the community of believers is equally annulled. The
function of the art world, therefore – critics, museums, magazines, even
this essay – is to maintain appearances, in particular, against any
agency or Master who would pretend to know everything. The master artist
is the person who possesses an almost God-like ability to both make art
and to simultaneously prohibit the making of art. This prohibition takes
the form in capitalist society of symbolic castration through surplus
value. A provisional definition of the avant-garde artist can therefore
be the condition of the acceptance of the inexistence of aesthetic
criteria. There are no guarantees for the social importance of artworks,
only the passage from creativity to consequences. For things to happen,
creation must be a condition of the truth of illusion.

### Reference List

Aranda, Julieta, Brian Kuan Wood and Anton Vidokle (eds). *e-flux
journal 21* (2010),

http://www.e-flux.com/journal/editorial-18/.

Bishop, Claire. Antagonism and Relational Aesthetics. *October 110*
(2004): 51-79.

Bishop, Claire. *Artificial Hells: Participatory Art and the Politics of
Spectatorship*, London: Verso, 2012.

Bürger, Peter. *Theory of the Avant-Garde*, trans. Michael Shaw,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984.

Graeber, David. ‘The Sadness of Post-Workerism’, or, ‘Art and Immaterial
Labour’ Conference: A Sort of Review, 2008,

http://www.scribd.com/doc/38093582/The-Sadness-of-Post-Workerism-David-Graeber.

Holmes, Brian. *Unleashing the Collective Phantoms: Essays in Reverse
Imagineering*, Brooklyn: Autonomedia, 2008.

Kester, Grant. *The One and the Many: Contemporary Collaborative Art in
a Global Context*, Durham: Duke University Press, 2011.

Léger, Marc James. Art and Art History After Globalization, *Third Text
26(5)* (2012): 515-527.

Léger, Marc James. The Subject Supposed to Over-Identify: BAVO and the
Fundamental Fantasy of a Cultural Avant Garde, in Léger (ed.) *Brave New
Avant Garde: Essays on Contemporary Art and Politics*, Winchester, UK:
Zero Books, 2012.

Raunig, Gerald, Gene Ray and Ulf Wuggenig (eds). *Critique of
Creativity: Precarity, Subjectivity and Resistance in the “Creative
Industries”*, London: MayFly Books, 2011.

Roberts, John. Art, ‘Enclave Theory’ and the Communist Imaginary. *Third
Text 23(4)* (2009): 353-367.

Sholette, Gregory. *Dark Matter: Art and Politics in the Age of
Enterprise Culture*, London: Pluto, 2011.

Yúdice, George. *The Expediency of Culture: Uses of Culture in the
Global Era*, Durham: Duke University Press, 2003.

Žižek, Slavoj. *The Fragile Absolute, or, Why Is the Christian Legacy
Worth Fighting For?,* London: Verso, 2000.

Žižek, Slavoj. *Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of Dialectical
Materialism*, London: Verso, 2012.

[^1]: Slavoj Žižek, The Fragile Absolute, or, Why Is the Christian
    Legacy Worth Fighting For?, London: Verso, 2000, pp. 31-2.

[^2]: Julieta Aranda, Brian Kuan Wood and Anton Vidokle (eds) e-flux
    journal 21 (2010),

    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/editorial-18/.

[^3]: See Gerald Raunig, Gene Ray and Ulf Wuggenig (eds) Critique of
    Creativity: Precarity, Subjectivity and Resistance in the “Creative
    Industries”, London: MayFly Books, 2011

[^4]: John Roberts, Art, ‘Enclave Theory’ and the Communist Imaginary.
    Third Text 23(4) (2009): 353, 358.

[^5]: David Graeber, ‘The Sadness of Post-Workerism’, or, ‘Art and
    Immaterial Labour’ Conference: A Sort of Review, 2008,

    http://www.scribd.com/doc/38093582/The-Sadness-of-Post-Workerism-David-Graeber.

[^6]: David Graeber, ‘The Sadness of Post-Workerism’, or, ‘Art and
    Immaterial Labour’ Conference: A Sort of Review, 2008,

    http://www.scribd.com/doc/38093582/The-Sadness-of-Post-Workerism-David-Graeber

[^7]: Slavoj Žižek, Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of
    Dialectical Materialism, London: Verso, 2012, pp. 1-2.

[^8]: Slavoj Žižek, Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of
    Dialectical Materialism, London: Verso, 2012, p. 1.

[^9]: Gregory Sholette, Dark Matter: Art and Politics in the Age of
    Enterprise Culture, London: Pluto, 2011, p. 1.

[^10]: Brian Holmes, Unleashing the Collective Phantoms: Essays in
    Reverse Imagineering, Brooklyn: Autonomedia, 2008, p. 19.

[^11]: Brian Holmes, Unleashing the Collective Phantoms: Essays in
    Reverse Imagineering, Brooklyn: Autonomedia, 2008, p. 81.

[^12]: Brian Holmes, Unleashing the Collective Phantoms: Essays in
    Reverse Imagineering, Brooklyn: Autonomedia, 2008, p. 91.

[^13]: Slavoj Žižek, Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of
    Dialectical Materialism, London: Verso, 2012, p. 1.

[^14]: Grant Kester, The One and the Many: Contemporary Collaborative
    Art in a Global Context, Durham: Duke University Press, 2011.

[^15]: Grant Kester, The One and the Many: Contemporary Collaborative
    Art in a Global Context, Durham: Duke University Press, 2011, pp.
    36-7.

[^16]: Grant Kester, The One and the Many: Contemporary Collaborative
    Art in a Global Context, Durham: Duke University Press, 2011, p. 49.

[^17]: Grant Kester, The One and the Many: Contemporary Collaborative
    Art in a Global Context, Durham: Duke University Press, 2011, p. 4.

[^18]: George Yúdice, The Expediency of Culture: Uses of Culture in the
    Global Era, Durham: Duke University Press, 2003.

[^19]: George Yúdice, The Expediency of Culture: Uses of Culture in the
    Global Era, Durham: Duke University Press, 2003, p. 9.

[^20]: Claire Bishop, Antagonism and Relational Aesthetics. October 110
    (2004): 51-79.

[^21]: Claire Bishop, Antagonism and Relational Aesthetics. October 110
    (2004): 65.

[^22]: Claire Bishop, Antagonism and Relational Aesthetics. October 110
    (2004): 67.

[^23]: Claire Bishop, Artificial Hells: Participatory Art and the
    Politics of Spectatorship, London: Verso, 2012.

[^24]: Slavoj Žižek, Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of
    Dialectical Materialism, London: Verso, 2012, p. 2.

[^25]: Slavoj Žižek, Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of
    Dialectical Materialism, London: Verso, 2012, p. 17.

[^26]: Slavoj Žižek, Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of
    Dialectical Materialism, London: Verso, 2012, p. 17.

[^27]: Slavoj Žižek, Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of
    Dialectical Materialism, London: Verso, 2012, p. 29.

[^28]: Marc James Léger, Art and Art History After Globalization, Third
    Text 26(5) (2012): 515-527

[^29]: Peter Bürger, Theory of the Avant-Garde, trans. Michael Shaw,
    Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984.

[^30]: Marc James Léger, The Subject Supposed to Over-Identify: BAVO and
    the Fundamental Fantasy of a Cultural Avant Garde, in Léger (ed.)
    Brave New Avant Garde: Essays on Contemporary Art and Politics,
    Winchester, UK: Zero Books, 2012.

[^31]: Slavoj Žižek, Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of
    Dialectical Materialism, London: Verso, 2012, p. 70.

[^32]: Slavoj Žižek, Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of
    Dialectical Materialism, London: Verso, 2012, pp. 106-11.


Ana Vilenica

## THE ART OF NEW CLASS GEOGRAPHY OF THE CITY - CULTURE-GUIDED URBAN REGENERATION SERVING THE *MODERNIZATION* OF THE PERIPHERY

This text was written within the framework of the project “Creative Work
and Urban Regenerations”, financed by the Secretariat for Science and
Technological Development of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina, as
part of a campaign entitled “The Right to a First Chance”. One version
of this text was published in a collection of papers of the Institute
for Researching Art in Novi Sad: Vilenica, Ana, “Umetnost regeneracije
grada – Predu(z)metništvo kao biznis model novih geopolitičkih
konstelacija \[The Art of City Regeneration – Artepreneurship as a
Business Model of New Geopolitical Constellations\]”.

The capitalization of cultural resources has become a central issue of
post-industrial urban rule, and in capitalist societies art and culture
has become an important instrument in the processes of creating new
spatial and geopolitical constellations. Creative armies of designers
and artists are employed as a resource for cosmetic renovations of
cities, production of simulacra of authenticity and symbolic capital in
the process of creating a new class geography of the city. In the
context of Serbia, such a structural connection between culture, art and
capital is practiced within the framework of the project of
*cultivating* the capitalist periphery through the practices of
culture-guided urban regenerations wherein the art establishment,
cultural and creative industries and social-entrepreneurial art take
part. In the local context, culture-guided urban regenerations are most
often presented uncritically, as an always positive contribution of the
processes of city *development*, the shaping of its *identity*, its
*modernization* and *progress*, both in public narratives and in the
academic discourse. Such a discursive practice acts as an accomplice to
the attempts at smoothly carrying out aggressive processes of
transformation in cities that merely continue to produce the unendurable
state of enormous social disparities, the degradation of workers’ and
social rights and the environment, as well as the all-round
discrimination of all those who do not belong to the desirable higher
classes, ethnicity, race or sexual orientation. Understanding this state
of affairs, as well as the role of culture and art, in a situation of
constant production of manipulative images and false promises, turns out
to be an important perspective towards articulating possible future
forms of struggle and creation of "new territories".[^1]


### Urban regenerations and the role of art and culture

In capitalist societies, the connection between art and urban
regenerations is established as a model of producing a new class
geography of the city.[^2] Such connections have been made possible
through the interpenetration of art and the entire social and cultural
production mechanism under the conditions of the cultural colonization
of life effected by capitalist production.[^3] Under these
circumstances, art has become a resource and one of the important places
when it comes to constructing power. The historical genesis of the
connection between art and the transformation of cities is linked to the
context of the USA and the 1970’s, when art created the preconditions
for the increase of real estate prices in reindustrialized cities[^4]
and thus for a new class recomposition of the city. In the districts
where artists came to live, art studios and art galleries proliferated,
and their symbolic capital increased the level of the rent, so that
poorer inhabitants of such districts tended to move out, and were
eventually followed by the artists themselves, who were replaced by
richer city dwellers. Today, the processes of class recomposition of
cities have been generalized at the global level, and their mechanisms
include manipulating *collective symbolic capital* as a new apparatus of
capitalist accumulation.[^5]

In the local context, the establishment of connections between art and
urban regenerations became possible with the forcible transformation of
socialist Yugoslavia after the 1990’s and the establishment of new
capitalist relations. This change was accompanied by the wartime
destruction of cities – urbicide, the transformation of ownership
structure from social to private ownership, the switch from
self-management relations to capitalist-exploitative relations, the
development of corruption mechanisms and the absence of regulations when
it came to the acquisition of capital, deindustrialization, the
pauperization of the population, as well as the destruction of the
existing mechanisms for work in the domain of culture and art, and the
implementation of a new art/entrepreneurial model. In the era of
socialism, the development of cities was based on central urban
planning, and the state was the chief investor and planner of the new
modern socialist city, aimed at fulfilling the needs of the new
socialist man. Today, the new initiators of *urban development* are
private and corporate investors, acting in cooperation with the state,
city administration, global financial institutions, civil society
organizations, and also with artists and workers in the sphere of
culture.[^6] This kind of *investor planning* is characterized by a
continual search for a profitable terrain where a surplus of value can
be achieved, which is controlled by particular elites. In such a
situation, urban regenerations no longer represent merely an act of
repairing the neglected parts of the city, but most often constitute a
radical act of pulling down the existing buildings and building new
ones. Such processes are no longer a part of systematic thinking about
cities. The idea and role of a general urban planning design almost
matter not at all, for an investor who purchases a cheap plot of land,
having previously deliberately lowered the building costs, will not have
any great difficulties when it comes to changing the regulated function
of that particular area. In this way, the city stops being a space where
one strives to establish at least a nominal equality of its inhabitants,
and becomes a space of drastic social and economic inequalities and
tensions. The development of cities is promoted through new optimistic
visions promising benefits for all. This urban optimism simultaneously
hides the process of the creation of new class topography of the city,
and a revengeful attitude towards those inhabitants who are not among
the privileged ones.[^7]

Art and culture become an instrument and accomplices in such processes
through the inclusion of creativity as applied imagination in the
processes of producing optimistic urban visions. That is what
metanarratives about creative industries, creative cities and creative
economy are all about.[^8] In these narratives, culture and art are
reduced to their economic function in the project of attracting
investors, tourism and stimulating the economy through a reduction of
labor costs and social contributions, giving a boost to the
entrepreneurial model of work, privatization of culture and maximizing
profit. On the one hand, it is an urban mantra, and on the other, it
constitutes a social-economic and cultural policy. What is at work here
is a complex mechanism that absorbs all the aspects of life in
exercising control and exploitation in cities. In the local context and
in other so-called transitional societies, the introduction of the
cultural industry and the implementation of ideas about creative economy
and creative city are viewed as an act of modernizing a *backward*
society. The insufficient presence of such practices is explained by the
incompatibility of the administrative, legal, banking and business
systems in post-socialist countries with those of "advanced
economies".[^9] In countries of South-Eastern Europe, this
*modernization model* is implemented through state policies, the
policies of cultural institutions and missions such as the British
Council or the Goethe Institute, and also as a business strategy of
private investors. Thus big cities in Serbia are regenerated through
European and local *policies* about creative cities, such as the
*Belgradisation of Belgrade* project and Belgrade’s bid for a European
Capital of Culture in 2020,[^10] as well as the latest EU cultural
project entitled *Creative Europe*. Also, regeneration is carried out by
organizing cultural, entertainment or sports events such as the
Universiade or the Eurovision Song Contest, and through individual
projects promoting cultural industries and art as a generator of urban
regeneration processes[^11] and a guarantor of social inclusion in their
implementation. Such practices are aimed at creating an image of the
city as an innovative, exciting, creative and safe place for living,
playing and consumption, promising benefits for all, whereas what is, in
fact, being planned is a city of walled fortresses wherein the elite and
its way of life are to be reproduced.

In the local context, since the 1990’s culture and art have become an
instrument of *progressive* *EU* *policies* aimed at creating an
environment conducive to effecting a transition to neoliberal capitalism
by way of carrying out the so-called *democratization of culture*, the
proclaimed goal of which was to free art and culture from the patronage
of the state and the Party, as a system which, allegedly, *a priori*
jeopardizes the basic human rights and the potential for creative
expression of individuals. What was produced in this process was a new
entrepreneurial subject of the artist, one no longer protected through
public financing but struggling for him/herself on the market.[^12] In
this way, art was used as a convenient tool for *cultivating* people on
the capitalist periphery. This neo-colonial process has not been
finished yet. Today, it is reproduced in the sphere of the
implementation of cultural industries and social-entrepreneurial art
used in the project of a *new modernization* of local society, which is
viewed as backward, and is particularly in evidence in the cases of
instrumentalisation of art in the processes of urban regenerations. A
new profile of the artist that is promoted in this way is the
entrepreneurial artist – artepreneur[^13] who resolves problems in a
non-linear and creative manner. He/she is a precarious worker who
manages his/her human capital through self-employment from one project
to another. The figure of artepreneur assumes a particularly important
role in times of crisis, when it emerges, on the one hand, as a victim
of the macroeconomic situation, and on the other, as a force that brings
salvation.[^14] In contemporary art, the very idea of emancipation and
activism has become an issue related to entrepreneurship, and thereby,
being placed in the service of capital, normalized to a great extent.

### Art-guided urban regenerations in Belgrade

In Serbia, culture- and art-guided urban regenerations have been
promoted over the course of the past decade, and the realization of such
ideas has only intensified in the last few years. We find examples of
practices of culture- and art-guided urban regenerations in Serbia in
big cities, mostly in Belgrade, where the political, economic and
cultural life of Serbia is centralized. The epicenter of such activities
is in the area of Belgrade’s riverbanks, which is currently the most
exclusive and profitable location in Belgrade. There has been interest
in the areas on the banks of the Sava and Danube rivers for a number of
years, and various projects prepared for that part of the city have
reflected the political, economic and cultural climate in the newly
established state. In early 1990, the Serbian Academy of Sciences and
Arts called an internal tender, within the framework of which the
project “Water City” emerged, and in 1996 the Socialist Party of Serbia
commissioned the project *Europolis*.[^15] These projects have never
been realized, but that part of the city has never stopped attracting
the attention of new investors and the political parties in power, most
often during the course of pre-election campaigns.

The interest shown in Belgrade’s riverbanks is not accidental and does
not concern only the attractiveness of the actual location. It also has
to do with the systematic work aimed at creating a new identity for
Serbia and Belgrade, in a place which, during the pre-socialist period,
in the first half of the 19^th^ century, was projected to become the
economic centre of the city.[^16] It was there that the history of
capitalist Serbia was made, aiming to establish a continuity through a
systematic erasure of the socialist history and the industrial
development of this area. What is worrying about this is the fact that
this old Belgrade was a city of enormous class differences, where more
than 80% of the population lived in extreme poverty.[^17] The riverbanks
are also a place of memory engineering, connected with the recent
history of the wars fought in the 1990’s on the territory of the former
Yugoslavia, which represents a continuation of the processes of
historical revisionism in Serbia, without which a projection of Belgrade
as a new European-Serbian urban centre for the higher classes is not
possible. One of the first great state projects of the regeneration of
that area was the renovation of Sava Square[^18], which began by the
expulsion of female sexual workers from the area, whose place was taken
over by a new revisionist monument to all war victims and defenders of
the homeland in the 1990-1999 period, thus equating victims and
executioners, and continuing the tradition of forgetting the fact that
the role of Serbia in those wars was that of an aggressor.

Today, that profitable area has become a battlefield where two
megaprojects vie for power: the project launched by the privately owned
company the Port of Belgrade entitled *Water City*, and the project
initiated by the Government of Serbia entitled *Belgrade on Water*.
*Water City* is an elite settlement occupying an area of 96 hectares of
land, whereas *Belgrade on Water* occupies a considerably larger area of
around 950 hectares of land, for which, apart from housing, the building
of business parks and a new port for yachts are also planned.[^19] By
planning the processes of urban regenerations and involving art and
cultural industries in the local strategic plans, the new creators of
optimistic visions wish to make Belgrade a part of the world market of
cities and make up for the decline of economic activities in the city.
The main social trump card of these projects is their promise to resolve
the problem of unemployment by creating new jobs in the sphere of
construction work during the realization phase, in the service sector of
the new walled communities, and also in the sector of cultural
industries, whereas what is happening in practice is a flexibilisation
and deregulation of the procedures for investors and undertakers,
coupled with a degradation of workers’ rights, which means an
increasingly frantic exploitation of all those engaged on the projects.
Experienced engineers of urban transformations, such as renowned world
architects, as well as mayors of cities wherein such processes have been
practiced, have already been involved in the initiation of urban
regeneration processes through the projects *Water City* and *Belgrade
on Water*. Thus the main designer of the *Water City* project is the
studio of Daniel Libeskind, whose biography includes numerous projects
through which similar processes have been initiated in other cities, and
the main consultant of the *Belgrade on Water* project is the well-known
New York mayor Rudolph Giuliani, whose brutal class and racist cleansing
of New York in the 1990’s is well known.[^20] The initial phases of both
projects involve the use of art and cultural industries, which play the
key role in the preparatory phase of changing the function of the area
in question. They are a part of the marketing strategy for promoting its
transformation, as well as a *guarantor of* *the social awareness* of
new spatial transformations. These involve the projects *Soho in
Belgrade*, *Mixer* and *Urban Incubator*.

The project “Soho in Belgrade” was initiated by the Port of Belgrade
company in 2012, as part of preparations for the realization of *Water
City*. The project presupposed enabling artists with well-established
reputations to use studios, free of charge, in one of the warehouses
inside the port, located in Dunavska Street, which formerly belonged to
the *Srbijateks* company. The aim of this joint initiative of tycoons
and the art establishment was the creation of the so-called *Soho
effect*. Over the past several years, this term has become a synonym for
urban regenerations in a number of instances involving the relocation of
art studios and artists’ flats to derelict part of cities in the hope of
producing additional symbolic capital and thus initiating the
accumulation of capital. In the case of the project *Soho in Belgrade*,
the bringing of artists to the warehouse had another function in
addition to the aforementioned one, namely, participation in the process
of changing the purpose of the space where the port operator is
located.[^21] What this is all about are the efforts of the *Worldfin*
company to close down the port through a drastic reduction of its scope
of business operations, and to effect a symbolic and legal change of its
function, so as to be able to build a new luxury settlement on that plot
of land. From the very start, the new owner wanted to hide the fact
that, according to the general urban plan, that plot of land was
designated to have an economic function, and that its privatization
involved a port operator only. Through corruptive arrangements between
political parties and tycoons, a change of the general urban plan was
brought about, so that the function of that part of the city was changed
from an economic one to a housing-commercial one. Further room for
maneuvering was provided by the problem that arose over entering the
city in the registry book as the owner of the said plot of land. To put
it more precisely, the new owners made use of the fact that the city
failed to observe the deadline and submitted incomplete documentation,
and proclaimed that plot of land to be theirs. Apart from the change of
the general urban plan, manipulation over entering the owner in the
registry book and the reduction of the operative capacity of the port
operator, art was also involved in the process of changing the function
of that plot of land through the project *Soho in Belgrade*.

That artists are activists operating in the service of local tycoons is
evidenced by the situation that arose after the Ministry of
Infrastructure and Energy, acting upon a request submitted by the
Anti-Corruption Council, passed a decision on evicting artists from the
Port of Belgrade on account of irregularities in the procedure of
allocating studios to artists. Artists from Soho mobilized themselves in
defense of the owner of the Port, whom they presented to the public as a
new patron of the arts who, as opposed to the state, provided artists
with a *roof above their heads.*[^22] It is a fact that the working
conditions of artists, after the degradation of the socialist-era
mechanisms that enabled artists to obtain a studio, had become almost
unendurable. However, the artists in question here are not a part of the
class of artists who do need help. These are successful
artists-entrepreneurs, who are favorably positioned on the world art
market, most of whom do have their own working space, whereas some of
them do not live in Belgrade. These *Sohoite* artists constitute the
embodiment of everything that the new art establishment represents
today. These are positions that are defended through a return to
aestheticism and individual expression as the main criterion of art.
Within the framework of this kind of positioning, opportunism and
commercialism become desirable characteristics and a generator of
success. What is at work here is a reactionary artistic practice that is
articulated in opposition to the domain of critical and contextual
practices, with which it enters into an open conflict through its
insistence on being separated from sociability as the measure of true
art. In Belgrade’s Soho, studios were allocated to select elite artists,
without anything in the nature of a public competition, which resulted
in the exclusion of those artists who are engaged in non-market-oriented
artistic practices, who are dependent on public financing and who do
need a working space. This resulted in an unbridgeable gap on the art
scene, which became visible to the public when the *Sohoites* organized
a panel discussion at the Kolarac People’s University, in the course of
which public interest was defended by a group of artists presenting
themselves as *The World Communal Heritage*. [^23]

To the present day, the artists in the service of tycoons have not been
evicted from the studios in the *Srbijateks* warehouse, for the
commission that is supposed to carry out their eviction has never
inspected the site, which, once again, serves to hide the corruptive
mechanisms in the state. The epilogue of the story about the Port of
Belgrade commenced in August 2013, through the initiation of the
bankruptcy procedure. Parallel with this, the Government of Serbia,
through the representatives of the ruling Serbian Progressive Party,
embarked on a new campaign of promoting the project *Belgrade on
Water*.[^24] It is important to point out that a part of the project
*Belgrade on Water* is being planned on the plot of land held by the
operator of the Port of Belgrade, which sheds more light on why the
bankruptcy procedure is being initiated right now, despite the efforts
of the Anti-Corruption Agency of many years to point out the
irregularities surrounding the privatization and operation of that
company. In this case, it would appear that the more powerful
bureaucrats have used the tycoons to close down the port operations in
order to take over a part of the land already prepared for this purpose.

Even though the project *Belgrade on Water* was presented to the public
only midway through 2013, systematic preparations for its implementation
have been carried out for several years, by engaging art and cultural
industries in the district which, by means of the fabrication of
tradition, has become known again under the name of Savamala. The model
of regeneration being implemented in Savamala today is based on an
attempt to introduce a creative economy through creative industries,
within the framework of a project of increasing the symbolic capital of
the place and resolving the problem of economic deficit through
*creativisation* and artistic-communal-participatory-social
entrepreneurship with a view to normalizing the situation of social
dissatisfaction, as well as a new legitimization of the history of the
place. These processes were not initiated by the city authorities but by
*independent* cultural initiatives, in cooperation with business groups
and with the German cultural mission – the Goethe Institute. Still, the
city and municipal authorities support the initiatives undertaken
through budget financing, allowing the use of space owned by the city,
and through affirmation by means of projects of establishing creative
economies and producing a creative city such as *Belgrade 2020*, which
accompanies Belgrade’s bid for a European Capital of Culture.

The introduction and affirmation of cultural industries and stimulation
of the development of entrepreneurial creative economy as a form of
social activism and struggle for the revitalization of Savamala is a
task set by the project *Mixer*, which includes the eponymous festival
and the newly opened venue *Mixer House*.[^25] Even though *Mixer*
proposes a model of partnership with the business sector, as a practice
of the *de-etatization* of the creative sector and its *liberation*, in
a parallel development public budget funds are invested in the project
through a number of public companies and funds, which clearly shows a
switch in the domain of public financing – from support given to
critical practices to support given to commercial initiatives. The idea
of *Mixer* is to turn Belgrade into a Balkan creative centre and
incubator for young creative talents by developing the concept of the
creative city with a nucleus in the industrial zone that is losing its
function. What is at work here are efforts aimed at the accumulation of
symbolic capital in Savamala through the promotion of established
creators and entertainers, and through a frantic exploitation of all
those who are not privileged. The ethics of entrepreneurial
inventiveness is used to hide the issue of the precarious work
conditions of those who do not belong to the top echelon, their enforced
volunteer work and the imposition of hierarchical models, and often the
investment of the personal funds of young artists during the realization
of works that are featured in the programmes of “Mixer”. On the other
hand, “Mixer” is also a form of incubator for producing an army of
creative workers who are supposed to set the creative industry in
motion, as a sphere that is broader than cultural industries, in the
domain of a new urbanization of Belgrade. *Mixer* is deeply involved in
the processes of the so-called "creative destruction [^26] through
initiating new mechanisms for the accumulation of capital in the course
of paving the way for the arrival of investors and the building of
*Water City*. It is one of those entrepreneurial tactics that glorifies
the successes of individuals and neglects the failures of the majority,
and instead of new social networks, it offers alienated consumerism.
What is created in this way is a false promise of creating new
*authentic* relations, paving the way for capitalist uniformity at all
levels.

Parallel with *Mixer*, the processes of urban regenerations in Savamala
are also initiated using a somewhat different method, through the
practices of communal-participative-social art, as a subgroup of the
creative sector, which are realized within the framework of the Goethe
Institute project *Urban Incubator*.[^27] *Urban Incubator* was
presented as a participative model of urban development, whose aim is to
improve the quality of life of the local population and to *democratize*
the process of decision-making by means of a higher degree of
involvement of the inhabitants of the district. The project is a
short-term one, will last one year, and during that time it should
accumulate symbolic capital and increase the market value of the
district, following which the artists will withdraw, leaving room for
the coming of investors and the development of tourism. *Urban
Incubator* represents an attempt at implementing the *Western model* of
culture-guided urban regeneration in the local context (of the eleven
projects that were accepted in the competition, only two were initiated
by local artists and architects), and has been recognized as such by the
local city authorities and the municipality of Savski venac – as having
potential for the *development* of Savamala.

Realizing projects within the framework of *Urban Incubator*, the
artists engaged assume the competencies of urban planners, social
workers, ethnographers and researchers, and pass themselves off as
experts when it comes to reinventing the space of Savamala through
interventions in public space, collecting personal stories from the
community, participative design, *crowdsourcing*, designing small
businesses and micro factories with a view to enlivening the area and
engaging people from the local community in order to establish a
continuity with the entrepreneurial history of the place. Such an
artistic practice represents a specific architecture of the community
that includes economic exchange, civic life, public property and the
establishment of various new connections. What is evident about this
project is that it privileges participative art as a tool for cosmetic
interventions aimed at resolving the systemic problems of Savamala, or
even resorting to enforced participation or imposing parameters of art
projects onto the inhabitants of Savamala with the intention of
"beautifying their living space and increasing the market value of their
flats".[^28] This coupling points to the ideological subtext of
participative-social-entrepreneurial artistic practices, which can be
defined as a *culturalisation of politics* or a dislocation of discourse
on complex and provocative social and political topics into the sphere
of culture and art.[^29] “Urban Incubator” is a symptom of social
architects’ *paranoid fear* of social unrest, and they engage art as a
*dependable means* of pacifying the accumulated dissatisfaction of the
inhabitants of Savamala, offering them a promise of a better life, all
the while, in fact, paving the way for the arrival of real estate
traders and opening more and more nightclubs and cafés.

### Conclusion

The transformation of the existing socialist structures and mechanisms
of cultural and artistic production, as well as the abandonment of
certain projects of sociability, the diminishing and increasingly
non-transparent public financing and the devastation of cultural
institutions, as well as giving in to the operation of the market
forces, have created conditions that are unendurable for the vast
majority of artists and workers in the sphere of culture. Seemingly
paradoxically, the public and investors give their support to the art
establishment and initiatives that promote *apolitical* entrepreneurial
artistic-designer practices. The creation of such conditions has
produced a fertile soil for manipulation and instrumentalisation of art
by the state and its powerful bureaucrats, tycoons and their firms and
corporations, the cultural missions of national European states and the
broader EU policies, as well as local cultural entrepreneurs who believe
that they are on their way to becoming capitalists.

As has been shown in the local context and in countries of the
periphery, what is at work here is practicing certain creative-economic
models of regeneration of cities in the name of the *modernization* and
*democratization* of local society and its economy, within the framework
of which are intertwined *national and neo-colonial modernization*,
which act as accomplices in the process of producing the spaces of
capitalist periphery. What this is about is the implementation of new
neoliberal regimes of producing cities and creating conditions for
producing a new class geography in spaces where there are still
populations of different social and economic status living together,
and, naturally enough, the production of new mechanisms of
flexibilisation of work and legislation in a project wherein the local
environment continues to be produced as a resource for *the developed
world*, and which is kept under control by means of carefully measured
loans which create a condition of *debt slavery*. Through the use of
art, culture and the cultural industry, *Western models* of urban
regenerations are implemented, the intention being to produce a quick
effect of changing the function of the given space, increasing its
symbolic capital, producing a new *identity* of the city, introducing
new forms of capitalist economy, as well as normalizing potential social
conflicts.

Still, despite their above-mentioned instrumental function in the
processes of reshaping cities, art, creativity and culture can also
represent significant factors of the destabilization of such *smooth*
processes of capital-guided urban transformation, and can participate in
producing a city based on different and more egalitarian relations,
outside the proven exploitative relations of power and division of
labor. For them to be established as such, it is necessary, to begin
with, to articulate a radical class critique of the (newly established)
capitalist relations in formerly socialist cities in Serbia, as well as
a critique of the use of art and culture, and also to be engaged in
continual theoretical-activistic-political work on producing different
relations, which are anxiously articulated today through certain local
practices in a state of *insobriety* produced by the social
transformation and the new rules of the game wherein (artistic and
cultural) activism becomes an instrument of capital.

### Reference List

Barok, Dušan. *On Participatory Art – Interview with Clear Bishop*.
Prague: Transit Initiative, 29 July 2009.
<http://www.academia.edu/771895/On_participatory_art_Interview_with_Claire_Bishop>

[Berman, Marshall](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marshall_Berman). [*All
That Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of
Modernity*](http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=mox1ywiyhtgC), Ringwood:
Viking Penguin. 1988.

Beograd 2020, <http://www.beograd2020.com/>

'Beograd na vodi: projekat vredan osam milijardi evra! \[Belgrade on
Water: A Project Worth Eight Billion Euros!\]', *Večernje novosti*, (14
October 2013),
<http://www.kurir-info.rs/beograd-na-vodi-projekat-vredan-osam-milijardi-evra-clanak-1034045>

'Beograd na vodi ili političari u kampanji \[Belgrade on Water or
Politicians Campaigning\]', *Politika*, (11 August 2013),
<http://www.politika.rs/rubrike/Beograd/Beograd-na-vodi-ili-politicari-u-kampanji.lt.html>

Berry Slater, J. and Iles, A. *No Room to Move: Radical Art and
Regenerate City*, London: Mute, 2010.

*Creative Europe*, <http://ec.europa.eu/culture/creative-europe/>

Dave Beech, 'Include Me Out!'. Blog entry, 1 September 2010,
<http://visualintosocial.wordpress.com/category/talks/dave-beech-on-participation/>

Castells, Manuel. *The Urban Question*, London: Edward Arnold, 1977.

Deutsche, Rosalyn and Gandel Rian, Cara, 'The fine art of
gentrification' *October* 31 (Winter, 1984): 91–111.

Foster, Hal. *The Return of the Real*, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1996.

Florida, Richard. *Cities and the Creative Class*, London: Routledge,
2005.

Florida, Richard. [*The Rise of the Creative Class. And How It’s
Transforming Work, Leisure and Everyday
Life*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Rise_of_the_Creative_Class),
London: Basic Books, 2002.

Glass, Ruth. *London: Aspects of Change*, London: Centre for Urban
Studies, 1964.

Grad na vodi – Luka Beograd \[Water City – the Port of Belgrade\].
http://www.lukabeograd.com/GradNaVodi/Masterplan.html

Grlja, Dušan. 'Antinomies of Post-Socialist Autonomy'. *Red Thread*
(2009), <http://www.red-thread.org/en/article.asp?a=16>

Harvey, David. *The Condition of Postmodernity*. Cambridge MA & Oxford
UK: Blackwell, 1992.

Harvey, David. *The Urbanization of Capital.* Oxford: Basil Blackwell,
1985.

Harvey David. *Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban
Revolution*, London: Verso, 2012.

'Incident na otkrivanju spomenika na Savskom trgu \[Incident During the
Unveiling of the Monument in Sava Square\]', *Kurir*, 24 March 2012.

Jameson, Fredric*. Postmodernizam u kasnom kapitalizmu* \[*Postmodernism
in Late Capitalism*\], Belgrade: KIZ Art Press, 1995.

Jones, Campbell and Murtola, Anna-Maria. 'Entrepreneurship, Crisis,
Critique, in Hjorth, Daniel (ed.) *Handbook on Organisational
Entrepreneurship*, Edward Elgar: Northampton, 2012.

Jovanović, Miloš. *Constructing the National Capital,* master diss., CEU
Budapest, Hungary, 2008.

Knežević, Vida, Miletić, Marko. 'Beograd 2020. – Grad čuda, nova
kulturna politika u Srbiji i prostori borbe \[*Belgrade 2020 – A City of
Wonder, the New Cultural Policy in Serbia and the Spaces of
Struggle*\]', in Vilenica, Ana, kuda.org *Na ruševinama kreativnog
grada* \[*On the Ruins of the Creative City*\], Novi Sad: kuda.org,
2012.

Libby Porter and Kate Shaw (eds) *Whose Urban Renaissance,* London:
Routledge, 2009.

Luka Beograd. Grad na vodi \[The Port of Belgrade – Water City\].
http://www.lukabeograd.com/GradNaVodi/Masterplan.html

Mikser \[Mixer\]. http://blog.mikser.rs/o-mikseru. 04th August 2013.

Monthoux, Pierre Guillet de. 'Organising Reality Machines: Artepreneurs
and the new Aesthetic Enlightenment', in Hjorth, Daniel (ed.) *Handbook
on Organisational Entrepreneurship*, Northampton: Edward Elgar, 2012.

Pasquinelli, Mateo. 'Kreativna sabotaža u fabrici kulture: umetnost,
džentrifikacija i metropola \[Creative Sabotage in the Culture Factory:
Art, Gentrification and the Metropolis\]', in Vilenica, Ana, kuda.org.
*Na ruševinama kreativnog grada*, Novi Sad: kuda.org, 2012.

Peck, Jamie. 'The creativity fix' in *Eurozine*, 28 June 2007, available
online: http://www.eurozine.com/articles/2007-06-28-peck-en.html

'Pokrenut stečaj Luke Beograd \[The Bankruptcy Procedure Initiated for
the Port of Belgrade\]', *Vreme*, 6 August 2013,
<http://www.vreme.rs/cms/view.php?id=1130342>

http://www.transparentnost.org.rs/ts\_mediji/stampa/2009/11NOVEMBAR/27112009.htm.

'Počela beogradizacija Beograda \[The Belgradisation of Belgrade
Begins\]', *Blic*, 2 August 2010,
<http://www.blic.rs/Vesti/Beograd/201025/Pocela-Beogradizacija-Beograda>

Rikalović, Gojko. *Kreativna Srbija: Novi pravci razvoja* \[*Creative
Serbia: New Directions of Development*\]. Belgrade: Anonymous said,
2011.

'Rudolf Džulijani u poseti Beogradu i SNS \[Rudolph Giuliani Visits
Belgrade and the Serbian Progressive Party\]', *Politika*, 11 September
2012.

Soho u Beogradu \[Soho in
Belgrade\],<http://www2.lukabeograd.com/soho-bg.html>

Smith, Neil. *Uneven Development: Nature, Capital, and the Production of
Space*, Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990.

Smith, Neil. *New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist
City*. London: Routledge, 1996.

Tomić-Koludrović, Inga and Petrić, Mirko 'Creative Industries in
Transition: Towards a Creative Economy?', in Švob-Đokić, Nada (ed.),
*The Emerging Creative industries in Southeastern Europe*, Zagreb:
Institute for International Relations, 2005.

United Nations Creative Economy Report (UN CER), United Nations, 2008
<http://unctad.org/en/Docs/ditc20082cer_en.pdf>

Urban Incubator Belgrade,
<http://www.goethe.de/ins/cs/bel/prj/uic/enindex.htm>.

C5 – School of Urban Practices. http://projectc5.blogspot.it/

'Uskoro novo lice Savskog trga \[Soon, a New Look of Sava Square\]',
*Blic*, 28 November 2011.

Vilenica, Ana, *Teorije i prakse aktivizma u umetnosti u drugoj polovini
XX veka* \[*Theories and Practices of Activism in Art in the Second Half
of the 20th Century*\], PhD thesis, The University of the Arts,
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2012.

Vilenica, Ana and kuda.org, 'Preuzmimo grad! Kako? \[Let’s Take Over the
City! How?\]' in Vilenica, Ana, kuda.org, *Na ruševinama kreativnog
grada*, Novi Sad: kuda.org, 2012.

Vilenica, Ana. 'Soho u Beogradu – Umetnička elita u službi tajkuna
\[Soho in Belgrade – The Art Elite in the Service of Tycoons\]', in
Maribor 2012, 14 September 2011.
http://82.149.22.226/\~mobcinamb/index.php?ptype=8&menu=0&id=220&Pid=617

Vuksanović-Macura, Zlata. *Život na ivici – Stanovanje sirotinje u
Beogradu 1919–1941* \[*Living on the Edge – The Housing of the Poor in
Belgrade 1919-1941*\], Belgrade: Orion Art, 2012.

World Bank. *Entrepreeurship Snapshots 2010: Measuring the Impact of the
Financial Crisis on new Business registration*, 2011.

Yudice, George. *The Expediency of Culture, Uses of Culture in the
Global Era*, Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2003.

Zibechi, Raúl. *Territories in Resistance – A Cartography of Latin
American Social Movements*, Edinburgh: AK Press, 2012.

Zukin, Sheron. *Cultures of the Cities*, Cambridge MA and Oxford UK:
Blackwell, 1995.

'Šeik ‘doneo’ BG na vodi, kredite… \[The Sheikh ‘Brings’ Belgrade on
Water, Loans\]', *B92*, 12 December 2013,
<http://www.b92.net/biz/vesti/srbija.php?yyyy=2013&mm=12&dd=12&nav_id=788601>

[^1]: Raúl Zibechi, Territories in Resistance – A Cartography of Latin
    American Social Movements, Edinburgh: AK Press, 2012.

[^2]: Harvey (2012); Berry Slater and Illes (2010); Pasquinelli (2012).

[^3]: Jameson (1995), Vilenica (2012).

[^4]: Rosalyn Deutsche and Gandel Cara Rian, 'The fine art of
    gentrification', October 31 (Winter, 1984): 91–111.

[^5]: David Harvey, Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the
    Urban Revolution, London: Verso, 2012.

[^6]: Ana Vilenica and kuda.org, 'Preuzmimo grad! Kako? \[Let’s Take
    Over the City! How?\]' inVilenica, Ana, kuda.org. Na ruševinama
    kreativnog grada. Novi Sad: kuda.org, 2012.

[^7]: Neil Smith, New Urban Frontier: Gentrification and the Revanchist
    City, London: Routledge, 1996.

[^8]: Florida (2005), UN CER (2008), Švob-Đokić (2005).

[^9]: Inga Tomić-Koludrović, Mirko Petrić, 'Creative Industries in
    Transition: Towards a Creative Economy?', in Nada Švob-Đokić, Nada
    (ed.), The Emerging Creative industries in Southeastern Europe,
    Zagreb: Institute for International Relations, 2005.

[^10]: Vida Knežević, Marko Miletić, 'Beograd 2020. – Grad čuda, nova
    kulturna politika u Srbiji i prostori borbe \[Belgrade 2020 – A City
    of Wonder, the New Cultural Policy in Serbia and the Spaces of
    Struggle\]' in Ana Vilenica, kuda.org. Na ruševinama kreativnog
    grada \[On the Ruins of the Creative City\]. Novi Sad: kuda.org,
    2012.

[^11]: Ana Vilenica and kuda.org, 'Preuzmimo grad! Kako? \[Let’s Take
    Over the City! How?\]' inVilenica, Ana,

    kuda.org. Na ruševinama kreativnog grada. Novi Sad: kuda.org, 2012.

[^12]: Dušan Grlja, 'Antinomies of Post-Socialist Autonomy', Red Thread
    (2009),
    [http://www.red-thread.org/en/article.asp?a=16](../customXml/item1.xml)

[^13]: Pierre Guillet de Monthoux, 'Organising Reality Machines:
    Artepreneurs and the new Aesthetic Enlightenment' in Daniel Hjorth
    (ed.) Handbook on Organisational Entrepreneurship, Northampton:
    Edward Elgar, 2012.

[^14]: Campbell Jones, Anna-Maria Murtola, 'Entrepreneurship, Crisis,
    Critique', in Daniel Hjorth (ed.), Handbook on Organisational
    Entrepreneurship, Edward Elgar: Northampton, 2012.

[^15]: 'Beograd na vodi ili političari u kampanji \[Belgrade on Water or
    Politicians Campaigning\]', Politika, 11 August 2013,
    [http://www.politika.rs/rubrike/Beograd/Beograd-na-vodi-ili-politicari-u-kampanji.lt.html](numbering.xml)

[^16]: Miloš Jovanović, Constructing the National Capital, master diss.,
    CEU, Budapest, Hungary, 2008.

[^17]: Zlata Vuksanović-Macura, Život na ivici – Stanovanje sirotinje u
    Beogradu 1919–1941 \[Living on the Edge – The Housing of the Poor in
    Belgrade 1919-1941\], Belgrade: Orion Art, 2012.

[^18]: 'Uskoro novo lice Savskog trga \[Soon, a New Look of Sava
    Square\]', Blic, 28 November 2011,

[^19]: Večernje novosti, 14 October 2013, Politika, 11 August 2013,
    “Water City” – the Port of Belgrade, 2010.

[^20]: Smith, 1996, Politika, 11 September 2012.

[^21]: Ana Vilenica, 'Soho u Beogradu – Umetnička elita u službi tajkuna
    \[Soho in Belgrade – The Art Elite in the Service of Tycoons\]' in
    Maribor 2012, 14 September, 2011.
    http://82.149.22.226/\~mobcinamb/index.php?ptype=8&menu=0&id=220&Pid=617.

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: 'Pokrenut stečaj Luke Beograd \[The Bankruptcy Procedure
    Initiated for the Port of Belgrade\]', Vreme, 6 August 2013,
    [http://www.vreme.rs/cms/view.php?id=1130342](styles.xml).

[^25]: Mikser \[Mixer\]. http://blog.mikser.rs/o-mikseru, 4 August 2013.

[^26]: Berman (1988), Harvey (1992).

[^27]: Urban Incubator Belgrade.
    [http://www.goethe.de/ins/cs/bel/prj/uic/enindex.htm](stylesWithEffects.xml)

[^28]: C5 – School of Urban Practices.
    [http://projectc5.blogspot.it/](settings.xml).

[^29]: George Yudice, The Expediency of Culture, Uses of Culture in the
    Global Era, Durham and London: Duke University Press, 2003.


Sandi Abram

## THE CREATIVE FACTORY: COLLECTIVE CREATIVITY AND AUTONOMY IN THE NEOLIBERAL MACHINE OF CREATIVE INDUSTRIES


### Introduction: Genteel Capital Courtship 

A maxim constantly repeated by the Ljubljana Mayor in the last few years
has been “Ljubljana – the most beautiful city in the world”. The
sentence condenses the dominant urbanistic managerial ideology of the
Municipality of Ljubljana (hereafter MOL): the ideology of consumerist
attractiveness. The grandiose urban plans following this directive are
transforming the city into a postcard in order to send it and sell it,
especially to the urban tourism industry which clings to the public
image-making as well as to other formations of capital. The
straightjacketing of the public space into lucrative, sterile, and
disciplinary logic is not anything new. Yet some strategies of the
neoliberal urbanism in city espoused with the reproduction of capital
seem to be the new ones. Whereas the cultural consumption was fuelling
the city’s symbolic economy[^1] for quite a while, the cities in the
21st century strain themselves to become areas of peculiar multifaceted
production closely intertwined with consumption once again .This time
they are shaping a pervasive marketing coalition between the cultural
and art establishments, real estate speculators, service business, and
city councils.

The contemporary urban tourism industry ceases to have the privileged
sole position of the producer of surplus value in the metropolis.
Instead, the neoliberal capital colonization is invading new spheres and
ways of surplus extraction, while mimicking the ideological processes of
gentrification under “new planetary vulgates”[^2], such as the
territorial “creative milieu”[^3]or the metropolitan “creative
city”.[^4] The proponents of such “new urban economy”[^5]tend to blindly
follow Florida’s nostrum of the new paradigm for urban planning that can
be found his all-encompassing predicament: “Human creativity is the
ultimate source of economic growth”.[^6] The territorial intertwines
with the cognitive colonization only to become a situated “creative
economy” in the era of cognitive capitalism.

We can witness the entire trajectory of these processes through the case
of a former bicycle factory in Ljubljana. Located in immediate vicinity
of the city centre, the Rog factory operated until 1991, then remained
closed and abandoned until 2006,[^7] when, after 15 long years of
stagnation, the group TEMP, along with a conglomerate of other praxes
and realities,[^8] reclaimed the factory for temporary use and brought
the Fordist Frankenstein back to life. From 2010 onwards, the
reappropriation of the commons was claimed. Ever since their liberation
and reanimation, the spaces in Rog² present an open cultural, social,
and political hub giving shelter to a multitude of autonomous collective
political subjects[^9] as well as to a broad range of artists and sports
enthusiasts practicing horizontal organization and communication on a
daily basis.

In order to demonstrate how the paradigmatic shift to postfordist
cognitive capitalism is taking place and form in Ljubljana, I divided
the article into three sections. It starts by introducing the project
based on a public-private partnership bearing the name Second
Chance,then highlighting its initial intentions with the autonomous Rog
and the neoliberal discourse while advocating creative industries, urban
regeneration etc. After problematizing the premises of the “new urban
economy” and of the designed emplacement of cognitive capitalism, the
article focuses on pilot project RogLab which is seen as a pervasive
creation of creative industries installed in the interim phase between
the unveiling of the megalomaniac plans and their implementation by the
owner of the factory, MOL. The third and concluding instance deals with
the changed spatial design, showing the proposed publically financed
gradual construction, or rather demolition, of the liberated Rog factory
which has, in fact, the purpose of neutralization and eradication of the
autonomous collective creativity in Rog, giving space to gentrification.

### The Public-Private Partnership Model as a Pan-European Paradigm of Gentrification: Second Chance

Starting with the year 2010, MOL’s endeavour to castrate Rog was wrapped
inside a benevolent cellophane, launched under the name the Second
Chance. The former Rog factory joined other postindustrial sites
including the former AEG factory (Nuremberg), HALLE 14 of the former
Cotton Spinning Mill (Leipzig), the tram depot (Krakow) and the Arsenale
(Venice). In order to understand the vulgar slogan of Second Chance
“from industrial use to creative impulse” we shall dwell directly on the
project’s description:

\[The slogan\] \[i\]t is a vision of five European cities to transform a
disused industrial site into a cultural and creative work and living
space and continuing their revitalisation with sustainable concepts.
\[…\] Nuremberg, Leipzig, Venice, Krakow and Ljubljana work
together[^10] to develop innovative strategies and concepts to upgrade
their former industrial site to a key cultural linchpin of the city’s
district. The cities face the same challenges of developing a heritage
and former industrial sites. Even though the revitalisation process is
at different stages in the five cities, the partners share the same
questions, challenges, opportunities and goals. \[…\][^11]

According to the initial plan, and through the private-public
partnership model, the buildings would be levelled first to the ground,
and then, once the ruins were cleaned up, the Centre of Contemporary
Arts was to be planned on top. To complement this grotesque picture, the
entire Rog’s surface (around 7,000 square meter) was to be split into
private (80.69%) and public (19.31%) ownership, whereby the private
“content” would comprise a residential (apartments, underground
garages), hotel and business section, while the public part were to be
exclusively reserved for *creative industries* (multi-purpose halls,
exhibition surfaces, studios etc.).[^12] The logic behind the two
bedfellows under neoliberalism is that the public would finance the
private and the private would parasite on public benefits. The
ideological premises nesting in the plan were in the apparent
satisfaction of both sectors: the private sector with profit-making
spaces and pseudopublic spaces as non-profit contents were to be
designed for the public.

However, the unveiled case of the expropriation of the commons is far
from being satisfactory. It is necessary to scale the whole problem on
the level of new urban regime which does not necessarily cling any
longer on the art world, as it symptomatically proposes to erect the
Centre of Contemporary Arts as well as spaces for arts and culture to be
featured inside. To expand a Hannah Arendt’s thought into the milieu of
“creative capitalism”, the privatization of the public *and* the commons
is intimately connected to the privatization of the political. And to
put it differently, gentrification through art was complemented with the
gentrification through “creativity”. The culturalization of capital
under a new panacea for post-industrial sites means: creative
“revitalisation through arts and culture”.[^13]

Generally speaking, gentrification can manifest in three forms:
traditional, modern, and artificial.[^14] The traditional one is
produced by exploiting historical and social “guardians of collective
symbolic and cultural capital (the museums, the universities, the class
of benefactors, and the state apparatus)”.[^15] The modern one is
produced by exploiting the art world and urban subcultures as the
artificial gentrification is a strategy generated by city councils
through public campaigns which promote the creative city in order to
attract investments and highly skilled workers. [^16] Concomitantly, the
“\[q\]uality of urban life has become a commodity, as has the city
itself, in a world where consumerism, tourism, cultural and
knowledge-based industries have become major aspects of the urban
political economy”.[^17]

What remains overshadowed is the mode of accumulation of the *collective
symbolic capital*. This capital, after Slovenia’s transition to
neoliberalism, was not exploited due to MOL’s active negation of the
autonomous cultural production in Rog today. In this sense, neither
squatters nor artists or other users of the postindustrial Rog had the
role of “bridge gentrifiers”[^18], i.e. transitional tenants, who would
be tolerated only until they raised property value. For example, in
Lower East Side (New York City) “\[t\]he artists were pioneers of
gentrification in this new frontier for the middle class, by creating an
art scene and community, combining the use of their space for living,
producing, performing and exhibiting.”[^19]

Instead of what Zukin[^20] termed “artistic mode of production”, the
parasitism through which the Second Chance has been building upon its
campaign, is availing to the emplaced and sediment collective symbolic
capital. It also accumulated during the socialistic industrial era and
strongly underlined the embedded collective memory. The “unique cultural
assets”[^21] of the former Rog industrial complex are in fact just
“\[...\] special marks of distinction that attach to some place, as they
have a significant drawing power upon the flows of capital more
generally.”[^22] Concisely, claims to the uniqueness yield monopoly
rent.[^23]

I shall underline here another passage from the project’s description:
“The cities face the same challenges of *developing a heritage and
landmarked former industrial sites*”.[^24] The claim indicates that the
accumulation of the *collective symbolic capital* would combine a
symbolic musealisation of the localized “unique” socialist remains
*with* the outlined cultural capital (the projected art spaces and
institutions) *in order to*, lastly, pave the way for capital
accumulation under the banner of creative industries. Thus, the
traditional way of gentrification will intertwine the (pseudo)modern and
the artificial form.

One of the premises of the pan-European Second Chance is therefore
purely teleological: the cognitariat would superimpose the bygone
proletariat which once laboured in these spaces spanning from
shipbuilders to bicycle factory workers. What is a better way to
illuminate the triumph of the bright “progressive” capitalism over the
obscure “archaic” socialism? Here also could fit the statement of the
MOL’s Head of Department for Culture expressed at the unveiling of the
new plans (which will be discussed in more detail later). According to
her, Rog will become a point of interest for the new generation of young
architects and designers, which will “get in the city centre a space and
tools for entering the labour market”.[^25]

Moreover, by perpetually referring to the *disused* and *(former) Rog
factory* the Second Chance is not only imaginarily discarding the
emplaced collective body from the past of a Yugoslav industrial
flagship, but rather the recuperation is broadened onto the semantic
level with a metonymy, castling the factory’s original denomination
(i.e. Rog) and by continuously repeating the Rog’s (distorted)
condition. The capitalist exploitation coated itself in “creativity”
abandoning the division between former/present, as the case of Rog
shows. The denial of this binarity is necessary, or else the legitimacy
of subjectivities present within Rog would be acknowledged.

In this view, an left-out part of the Second Chance description is to be
understood: “\[These postindustrial sites are\] the industrial estates
who deserve this 2nd chance”.[^26] The positioning of the Second Chance
in the linear continuation of the paternalistic logic of urbanism (the
anthropomorphized discourse of giving estates a second opportunity)[^27]
is actively denying the collective reappropiation of the space in 2006
as well as it is denying the ongoing manifold autonomous cultural,
social, and political production being housed in the buildings.[^28]
This attempt to revive a space already revived[^29]can signal only one
thing: creative industries will lie on the ashes of autonomous
collective creativity. One could go that far to delineate the latter as
a fetishist urban necrophilia: the compulsive reuse of the moribund
object-factory as a stimulus of capital consolation (or better yet,
accumulation). It is an object to which either any of the current
vivacity is apathetically negated, either to which the emancipating
collective creativity will be institutionally euthanatized by turning it
into an urban corpse – or only to be repossessed later. Once the
collective creative capital failed to undergo capitalist valorisation,
the only attraction left to the capital and managerial establishment is
to cling to the cadaveric proletarian collective “body”.

Pointed out by Pasquinelli, Harvey’s *collective symbolic capital* can
be conceived as another name for the “*capitalist exploitation of the
commons* – a form of exploitation that does not need violent
enclosures”.[^30] Here the notion of violence deserves further
attention. Ever since Rog’s reappropriation, MOL is intentionally
leaving Rog in deficient circumstances, without the minimal material
conditions; ever since the reappropriation the whole complex is
functioning in abstraction of electricity.[^31] Rog’s users are
quotidianly experiencing systematic exhaustion, longitudinal vegetation
on their bodies, and, generally, the menace of eviction – all instances
of subtle structural violence strongly calling into question the
presumed no-violence-policy of capital exploitation.

Now I can focus on the postulation regarding the *exploitation of the
commons.* We are faced with the notion of the exploited commons, which
is easily applicable to the enunciated capitalistic mode of production
as immaterial, pertaining to cognitive, affective labour. This appears
be the position after the implementation of Second Chance, turning Rog
from a closedown factory into an immaterial social factory. Again,
according to the description the project’s intention is: “\[...\] to
transform a disused industrial site in a *cultural and creative* *work
and living space* \[...\]”.[^32] The phrase quintessentially comprises
the concept of bio-political production, in which all spheres of social
life are produced: “\[...\] post-Fordism and the immaterial paradigm of
production adopt performativity, communication, and collaboration as
central characteristics”.[^33] Perhaps this is an opportune time to
fasten more particularly the pervasive creation of the creative
industries.

### In the White Cube, a Simulacrum of the Creative Industries: RogLab Centre Pilot Project

The capital’s colonization of the public spaces and the commons once was
exemplified in 2012 with the so called RogLab Centre Pilot Project.
Installed as a plot investment of the Second Chance project and located
on the embankment directly across the street from Rog, RogLab takes a
shape of an entirely white cargo container. Here we have a double
interpretation of an object pioneering the local creative industries,
offering itself. The white container cannot be seen only as the advocate
of the White Cube and thus flagging the penetration of the new
“creative” urban economy; the container is simultaneously a prime
example of a boxed up neoliberalism through which the mantra of free
movements of goods, capital, services and people, is transmitted around
the globe. By analogy with Giddens’ the conceptualization of the state
as a territorial (bordered) power-container, RogLab strains in
presenting itself as an unconfined “creative” power container and a
dynamo for the creative economy:

RogLab is conceived as a production, educational and presentation space
in a 30 m²‑container object. It is dedicated to activities in the fields
of architecture, design and contemporary art, their mutual connecting
and cross-sector collaboration (economy, education, science,
environment, space…) as well as international networking.[^34]

RogLab’s spatial separation from the Rog building by being *outside* yet
*in face of* it, does not mean its contents are hermetically
encapsulated or, at first glance, antithetic to those nourished in
Rog.[^35] Quite to the contrary: this act of colonization of the public
space means as well the colonization of creativity by being the
epistemological and material forerunner of the creative industries in
the area. For example, RogLab is openly acknowledging the devastation of
Rog; it promotes to be “an attractive mobile architecture \[...\]
marking the beginning of the renovation of the former Rog factory. The
pilot project will function as a small scale model of the future Rog
Centre”.[^36]

Further, on the external surface of RogLab an imprinted characterization
reads: “In the 3D workshop for fast prototyping, we help you *develop
ideas into tangible products*”[^37] Thus, the neoliberal capitalist
paradigm of productive knowledge is canalized into an applicable and
vendible market form. “Neoliberalism,” asserts Harvey[^38] “\[…\]
proposes that human well-being can best be advanced by liberating
individual entrepreneurial freedoms and skills within an institutional
framework characterized by strong private property rights, free markets,
and free trade. The role of the state is to create and preserve an
institutional framework appropriate to such practices.”

Taken together, Rog*Lab* can indeed be viewed as *labor-*atorial, a
laboratorial materialization reflecting the intertwined processes of the
capitalist rent parasiting on the productive commons,[^39] incorporation
of existent subversion, commodification of autonomous collective
creativity, and the (forerunner and justifier of) spatial
usurpation.[^40] The paradigmatic workshop/art project “Socialdress”
carried out in RogLab might be the utmost illustration of these
processes *in vitro*. Championing the creative industries, the workshop
sucked out the labour of unemployed women who were voluntarily
embroidering clothes for several days:

This art project \[…\] takes place in the form of a clothes and
household fabrics fashion collection. The collection incorporates
slogans from the recent Slovenian protests[^41] – the expression of the
general public’s rebellion and dissatisfaction with the existing system.
Modern embroidery machines will be used to embroider the selected
slogans onto fabrics and clothes, thus empowering them. Traditional
craft skills, modern technology, fashion, social engagement, activism
and social entrepreneurship all join forces in this new
interdisciplinary art project \[...\].[^42]

The machine of commodification, which mimics under the coat of
benevolence and social responsibility, attempted to decontextualize and
castrate the collective subversive potentiality of the uprisings by
aestheticisation and banalization, vampirizing the free labour: “The
\[Socialdress\] project promotes and supports sewing e.g. dress
home-making. It transforms the sewing into an entertaining and useful
social activity”.[^43] Here, the unpaid social cooperation, the mutual
production, and interdisciplinary collaboration all go a step further
from the individualism inherent to the anatomized precariat. The
neoliberal machine does not base its agenda anymore on explicit
exclusion, but rather on the controlled inclusion – preferably the
collective one. In this vein, it is necessary to mention the emphasis of
the Second Chance on the newly incarnated neoliberal species, who do not
go under the name stockholders or shareholders but stakeholders instead.
According to Marx’s general intellect or to Kropotkin’s mutual aid, a
neoliberal counterpart is allocated and linked with the fabrication of
consent through a Habermassian ideal communication and rational
discourse. Throughout the practice of the Second Chance, the
colonization of the commons goes hand in hand with the adoption of the
formalized “inclusive bottom-up participatory” smokescreen.

### Gentrification Goes Public

What was to be witnessed in 2013 was another twist in the neoliberal
municipal urban policies. In the explication of the changed spatial plan
for Rog, under the heading “*Assessment of the situation, causes and
aims why the document is necessary*” the scenario runs: since the
initial blueprint was approved, the situation, especially economic, has
been changing and the arrangement of Rog’s area to the extent of the
previous spatial plan was no longer possible. In reality, no private
investor was willing to take part in the Second Chance, thereby
decelerating the entire process of the execution; indeed, an irony
derived directly out of the global financial crisis. Neither the
downfall of a private-public partnership or the subsequent resignation
of capital did not bury the peculiar spatial voracity. Notwithstanding
the financial deficit and the public debt, the construction pretence is
now to be orchestrated by the municipality independently of the
investments from the private sector.

Therefore, a changed spatial plan was proposed enabling the construction
in several stages. More accurately, a seven-phased (re)construction is
now being designed. In the first stage of the construction, the
blueprint includes two crucial interventions: the “outside arrangement”
around the central building *and* an underground garage overlapping with
the position of almost all buildings on the territory of Rog.[^44] In
all likelihood, the planned besiegement of the central building and the
“outside arrangement” will manifest itself directly in the form of an
internal reconstruction of the main factory outbuilding, leaving behind
another “late capitalist hollow space”[^45]

As for the surrounding buildings without the historical
preservation,[^46] which itself allows façadism— and the demolishment of
the building’s interior yet leaving its exterior intact— these will be
levelled to the ground, causing another symptomatic fenced urban void,
filled at the best with gravelled parking spaces, as this profitable
emptiness is the *modus operandi* for architectural shortfalls in the
city. What would evidently distinguish it from other urban voids caused
by the lack of investments is contained in the intention of transforming
the building into a politically silent urban phantom. The eviction of
users, the fencing off potential occupants, and seclusion are all
practical strategies of de-politization. In other words, the complete
resignation from the project remains unimaginable since gentrification
operates in a broader urban context. With the restructuration into a
“postindustrial creative site” though, the refashioned Rog factory will,
at best, become the situated gravitational field for gentrification, as
the process of gentrification will inevitably include the entire
surrounding neighbourhood. (PHOTO)

### "Gentrification is class war"

The fundamental reason behind the repeatedly converted plans of
demolishment of the liberated Rog factory area seems simple;[^47]
communities “that swarm in Rog, are not dangerous for MOL because of the
revitalization of \[...\] abandoned spaces, but because of the swarming
of new and different forms of social activities, connections and
collaboration”.[^48] The eradication and neutralization, discursive or
violently material, of autonomous collective creativity, troubling the
flows of capital, are inevitably inherent to wider processes of capital
accumulation. For once, in the current condition, the extraction of
monopoly rent as the business model in cognitive capitalism (Pasquinelli
2010) is obstructed. In the hegemonic notion of the collective
creativity, we run into the creativity as ideological substitution for
labour. The creativity as understood by the apologist of corporative
creative industries has not become the Deleuzian becoming, but an
ideological superstructure of labour and therefore exploitation.

Beuys’ famous claim fulfils itself in an odd manner – in the age of
cognitive capitalism, elevating each and every individual into divinity,
everyone is not an artist, but a *creator*. Fortunately, the
repolitization of creativity and its emancipation from the neoliberal
colonial deadlock are being collectively produced in factories of the
Foucauldian insurrectional subjugated knowledge. The remaining question
is whether one will hop on the moving train rushing through the
urbanscape moved by these machines.

### Reference List

Anonymous. 1989. *The Occupation of art and gentrification*. Internet
source:
http://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-the-occupation-of-art-and-gentrification\#fn\_back7,
reviewed October 1, 2013.

Bloch, Ernst. ‘Building in Empty Spaces,’ in Bloch, Ernst: *The Utopian
Function of Art and Literature*. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press,
1959/1996, pp. 185-198.

Bourdieu, Pierre and Loïc Wacquant. ‘NewLiberalSpeak. Notes on the new
planetary vulgate.’ *Radical Philosophy* 105 (2001) pp. 1-5.

Florida, Richard. *Cities and the Creative Class*. London, New York:
Routledge, 2005.

Gregorčič, Marta. ‘Rog – presenečanja, iz katerih rojijo multitude.’
*Časopis za kritiko znanosti*, 34 -223 (2006) pp. 7-10.

Hardt, Michael and Antonio Negri. *Multitude: War and Democracy in the
Age of Empire*. New York: Penguin Press, 2004.

Harvey, David. 'The Art of Rent: Globalisation, Monopoly and the
Commodification of Culture ' (2001).
http://www.generation-online.org/c/fc\_rent1.htm

Harvey, David. *A Brief History of Neoliberalism*. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2005.

Harvey, David. ‘The Right to the City.’ *New Left Review*, 53 Sept. Oct
(2008): 23-40.

Institute for Civilisation and Culture. *SWOT Analysis for the Purposes
of the Revitalisation of the Former Rog Factory with the Establishment
of the Rog – Centre of Contemporary Arts*. (2011) Internet source:
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/SWOT\_Analysis\_Ljubljana.pdf

Jelesijević, Nenad. Rog med razlastitvijo in prilastitvijo skupnega.
Radio Študent (5 April 2012). Internet source:
http://radiostudent.si/kultura/dlako-z-jezika/rog-med-razlastitvijo-in-prilastitvijo-skupnega

Krajčinović, Nina. Rog kot politični projekt brez zagotovljenih
sredstev. *Delo* (5 September 2013)
http://www.delo.si/novice/ljubljana/rog-kot-politicni-projekt-brez-zagotovljenih-sredstev.html

Katrin Fischer et al. *Revitalisation through arts and culture: new
developments for 5 European industrial complexes.* Nürnberg: Second
Chance (2012)
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/SECOND-CHANCE\_Mid-Project-Brochure\_online\_final.pdf&gt;,
reviewed 1 October, 2013.

Kurnik, Andrej and Barbara Beznec. ‘Resident Alien: The Rog Experience
on the Margin,’ in Radical Education Collective (eds) *New public
spaces: dissensual political and artistic practices in the post-Yugoslav
context*. Maastricht: Jan van Eyck Academie, 2009, pp. 45-62.
http://radical.temp.si/reader/AndrejBarbara.pdf

Kurnik, Andrej. *Vzamimo si mesto!* (2013),
http://www.njetwork.org/Vzamimo-si-mesto

Landry, Charles. *The Creative City: A Toolkit for Urban Innovators*.
London: Earthscan, 2000.

Mihelič, Breda et al. *Les anciennes usines "Rog"/Ljubljana : exemple
Européen de mise en valeur du patrimoine architectural abandonné : actes
du 4ème Colloque Eurocultures, Ljubljana: 29 mai - 2 juin* (1995),
Brussels: Institut Supérieur d'Architecture Saint-Luc.

MOL. 2013. *Dopolnjeni osnutek Odloka o spremembah in dopolnitvah Odloka
o občinskem podrobnem prostorskem načrtu za del območja urejanja CI 5/6
Rog*, http://www.ljubljana.si/file/1351552/dop\_osn\_spr\_oppn\_ci56.pdf

Pasquinelli, Matteo. ‘Beyond the Ruins of the Creative City: Berlin’s
Factory of Culture and the Sabotage of Rent’, in KUNSTrePUBLIK (eds),
*Skulpturenpark Berlin\_Zentrum*. Berlin: Verlag der Buchhandlung
Walther König, 2010.

Pungerčar, Marija Mojca. ND, http://www.3via.org/index.php?htm=mojca

Rog Centre Pilot Project. *About*, (2013) http://www.roglab.si/en/about

Rog Centre Pilot Project. *Socialdress – Power to the People* (2013),
http://www.roglab.si/en/fresh/2013/socialdress\_empowering\_people

Sassen, Saskia. ‘Locating cities on global circuits.’ *Environment &
Urbanization* 14 (2002): 13-30.
http://www.rrojasdatabank.info/urban/euv14n1p13.pdf

Second Chance. *Project Description* (2013). Internet source:
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=26

Second Chance. The Former Rog Factory (2013) Internet source:
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=16

Second Chance. Rog Centre of Contemporary Arts (2013). Internet source:
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=94

Second Chance. Can Culture Alone Regenerate Places? (2012),
http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?p=1112

TEMP. ‘TEMP about TEMP, or a quick and unsystematic retrospective of the
workings of one temporary and informal multidisciplinary group.’ In:
Radical Education Collective (eds.): *New public spaces: dissensual
political and artistic practices in the post-Yugoslav context*.
Maastricht: Jan van Eyck Academie (2009): 144-158,
http://radical.temp.si/reader/TEMP.pdf

The Institute for the Protection of Cultural Heritage of Slovenia
*STROKOVNE ZASNOVE VARSTVA KULTURNE DEDIŠČINE za območje MESTNE OBČINE
LJUBLJANA* (2008),
http://giskd2s.situla.org/evrdd/SZ/eVRD\_SZ\_Ljubljana\_2008\_02\_00.pdf

Vercellone, Carlo. *The New Articulation of Wages, Rent and Profit in
Cognitive Capitalism* (2008).,
http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/26/55/84/PDF/The\_new\_
articulation\_of\_wagesHall1.pdf

Zukin, Sharon. *Loft Living: Culture and Capital in Urban Change*,
Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.

Zukin, Sharon. *Landscapes of Power: From Detroit to Disney World*,
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.

Zukin, Sharon. *The Cultures of Cities*, Cambridge: Blackwell, 1995.

[^1]: Sharon Zukin, *Landscapes of Power: From Detroit to Disney World*.
    Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991. Sharon Zukin, *The
    Cultures of Cities*, Cambridge: Blackwell, 1995.

[^2]: Pierre Bourdieu and Loïc Wacquant, ‘NewLiberalSpeak. Notes on the
    new planetary vulgate’, *Radical Philosophy* 105 (2001): 1-5.

[^3]: Charles Landry, *The Creative City: A Toolkit for Urban
    Innovators*, London: Earthscan, 2000.

[^4]: Richard Florida, *Cities and the Creative Class*, London, New
    York: Routledge, 2005.

[^5]: Saskia Sassen, ‘Locating cities on global circuits,’ *Environment
    & Urbanization* 14 (2002): 22.
    http://www.rrojasdatabank.info/urban/euv14n1p13.pdf

[^6]: Richard Florida, *Cities and the Creative Class*, London, New
    York: Routledge, 2005, p. 22.

[^7]: For a more detailed history of Rog from the second part of the
    19th century onwards see Mihelič et al. (1995) or the historical
    digest available on Tovarna Rog website
    (http://tovarna.org/node/131); for a sociopolitical analysis see
    Kurnik and Beznec (2009); Kurnik (2013).

[^8]: Cf. TEMP. ‘TEMP about TEMP, or a quick and unsystematic
    retrospective of the workings of one temporary and informal
    multidisciplinary group.’ In: Radical Education Collective (eds.):
    *New public spaces: dissensual political and artistic practices in
    the post-Yugoslav context*, Maastricht: Jan van Eyck Academie
    (2009): 144-158. Internet source:
    http://radical.temp.si/reader/TEMP.pdf

[^9]: To name some*: Invisible Workers of the World, World for Everyone,
    Civil Initiative of the Erased Activists, Front of the Precarious,
    Iz-hod* (Walk-out) movement for the deinstitutionalization from
    total institutions, Occupy Movement \#15o, Anti-Capitalist Block
    etc.

[^10]: Together work, of course, the city managers and the appurtenant
    administration.

[^11]: Second Chance, *Project Description* (2013), pp. 4,
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=26

[^12]: Institute for Civilisation and Culture. *SWOT Analysis for the
    Purposes of the Revitalisation of the Former Rog Factory with the
    Establishment of the Rog – Centre of Contemporary Arts* (2011).
    Internet source:
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/SWOT\_Analysis\_Ljubljana.pdf

[^13]: See the homonymous brochure, Katrin Fischer et al.
    *Revitalisation through arts and culture: new developments for 5
    European industrial complexes.* Nürnberg: Second Chance (2012)
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/SECOND-CHANCE\_Mid-Project-Brochure\_online\_final.pdf&gt;,
    reviewed 1 October, 2013.

[^14]: Matteo Pasquinelli, ‘Beyond the Ruins of the Creative City:
    Berlin’s Factory of Culture and the Sabotage of Rent,’ KUNSTrePUBLIK
    (eds), *Skulpturenpark Berlin\_Zentrum*. Berlin: Verlag der
    Buchhandlung Walther König (2010)

[^15]: David Harvey, 'The Art of Rent: Globalisation, Monopoly and the
    Commodification of Culture' (2001).
    http://www.generation-online.org/c/fc\_rent1.htm

[^16]: Matteo Pasquinelli, ‘Beyond the Ruins of the Creative City:
    Berlin’s Factory of Culture and the Sabotage of Rent,’ KUNSTrePUBLIK
    (eds.): *Skulpturenpark Berlin\_Zentrum*. Berlin: Verlag der
    Buchhandlung Walther König (2010).

[^17]: David Harvey, ‘The Right to the City.’ *New Left Review* 53
    (September-October 2008): 31.

[^18]: Sharon Zukin, *The Cultures of Cities*, Cambridge: Blackwell,
    1995, p. 111.

[^19]: Anonymous. *The Occupation of art and gentrification* (1989)
    pp.7.
    http://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anonymous-the-occupation-of-art-and-gentrification\#fn\_back7

[^20]: Sharon Zukin, *Loft Living: Culture and Capital in Urban Change*,
    Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.

[^21]: The phrase is taken from the announcement of the public
    presentation carried out by Lia Ghilardi in the City Museum at MOL's
    invitation (see Second Chance 2012).

[^22]: David Harvey, 'The Art of Rent: Globalisation, Monopoly and the
    Commodification of Culture' (2001).
    http://www.generation-online.org/c/fc\_rent1.htm

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: Second Chance, *Project Description* (2013) Emphasis mine.
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=26.

[^25]: Demšič in Krajčinović. Nina Krajčinović, 'Rog kot politični
    projekt brez zagotovljenih sredstev', *Delo* 5^th^ September 2013,
    http://www.delo.si/novice/ljubljana/rog-kot-politicni-projekt-brez-zagotovljenih-sredstev.html

[^26]: Second Chance, *Project Description* (2013).
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=26.

[^27]: A topic deserving its own Foucauldian analysis is not just the
    inflation of euphemisms for gentrification but also the medical,
    anthropomorphized, and biopolitical urbanistic discourses (e.g.
    revitalisation, regeneration, reanimation, rehabilitation,
    sustainable, degraded, sanitation).

[^28]: Initially the entire multitude in Rog was nonchalantly ignored
    from any description whatsoever. However, the current and updated
    version of the project’s website is recognizing the contemporary
    murmurings in the Rog’s building – altogether in one sentence:
    “Since 2006 the building is being used on a daily basis by temporary
    users who developed cultural, artistic, sport and social activities
    on site” (Second Chance 2013).

[^29]: Nenad Jelesijević, Rog med razlastitvijo in prilastitvijo
    skupnega. Radio Študent (5 April 2012).
    http://radiostudent.si/kultura/dlako-z-jezika/rog-med-razlastitvijo-in-prilastitvijo-skupnega

[^30]: Matteo Pasquinelli, ‘Beyond the Ruins of the Creative City:
    Berlin’s Factory of Culture and the Sabotage of Rent,’ KUNSTrePUBLIK
    (eds): *Skulpturenpark Berlin\_Zentrum*. Berlin: Verlag der
    Buchhandlung Walther König (2010)

[^31]: This situation is somewhat being compensated by relying on the
    usage of electricity generators that require an increasingly larger
    amount of money for each organized event.

[^32]: Second Chance, *Project Description* (2013). Emphasis mine.
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=26

[^33]: Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, *Multitude: War and Democracy in
    the Age of Empire*, New York: Penguin Press, 2004, p. 200.

[^34]: Rog Centre Pilot Project, *About* (2013)
    http://www.roglab.si/en/about

[^35]: This separation is also an uncanny physical evidence of not
    accepting the present situation of the living self-organized
    communities in Rog.

[^36]: Second Chance, Rog Centre of Contemporary Arts (2013),
    http://www.secondchanceproject.eu/wp/?page\_id=94

[^37]: Ibid. Emphasis mine.

[^38]: David Harvey, *A Brief History of Neoliberalism*, Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2005, p.2.

[^39]: Carlo Vercellone, *The New Articulation of Wages, Rent and Profit
    in Cognitive Capitalism* (2008).
    http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/26/55/84/PDF/The\_new\_
    articulation\_of\_wagesHall1.pdf

[^40]: Such intents were already detectable during the proposal to erect
    the Centre of Contemporary Arts.

[^41]: To give few examples of protest slogans coined by the popular
    anger to be later embroidered: **“***gotof si*” (you are finished!),
    “*fertik je*” (it’s over), “*vse jih bomo nesli vun*” (we’ll take
    them all out), “*ulice so naše*” (the streets are ours), “*lopovi!*”
    (crooks!), “*moč ljudem, ne strankam*” (power to the people, not to
    parties).

[^42]: Rog Centre Pilot Project. *Socialdress – Power to the People*
    (2013),
    http://www.roglab.si/en/fresh/2013/socialdress\_empowering\_people

[^43]: Marija Mojca Pungerčar, ND (2013),
    http://www.3via.org/index.php?htm=mojca

[^44]: MOL 2013.

[^45]: Ernst Bloch, ‘Building in Empty Spaces’, in Bloch, Ernst: *The
    Utopian Function of Art and Literature* Cambridge, Massachusetts:
    MIT Press (1959/1996): 185-198.

[^46]: The urbanistic taxidermy sparing the main factory outbuilding
    will be performed because it falls under the cultural heritage
    protection (cf. The Institute for the Protection of Cultural
    Heritage of Slovenia 2008, 45).

[^47]: The urban plans of MOL can be, to some extent, seen as the tactic
    response to the claims during the temporal occupation: the problem
    of empty premises, the lack of a clear strategy with Rog, the need
    of spaces for sociocultural production etc.

[^48]: Marta Gregorčič, ‘Rog – presenečanja, iz katerih rojijo
    multitude.’ *Časopis za kritiko znanosti*, 34 / 223 (2006): 7-10.


Irmgard Emmelheinz

## NEOLIBERALISM AND THE AUTONOMY OF ART: THE CULTURE OF POWER, THE POWER OF CULTURE[^1]

In Mexico, advanced neoliberal reforms are taking place at a much faster
pace than in other parts of the world. These reforms have delivered not
only new forms of life and making a living but also new sensibilities.
The erosion of the social contract brought by these reforms, has had
tangible (all negative) effects on the social tissue. This has
materialized, for example, in what is known as the most violent and
dangerous city in the world, Ciudad Juárez, where in 2010 alone, 3000
people were killed. Bearing this in mind, I am defining neoliberalism as
a *sensibility* that shapes subjectivities, permeates art and culture,
differentiates and homogenizes people, molds lives and desires, mistakes
information for knowledge, gives shape to space and thus to social
relations, normalizes violence, creates ways of seeing the world giving
shape to common sense that justifies destruction and dispossession with
notions progress and development, or that tries to solve economic
precarity with self-help and permanent education. I argue that
neoliberalism is more than a system that is ruled by a free market
economy, which implies the privatization of the welfare state and an
array of government services (for example: education, health, energy),
subcontracting to the private sector and changes in labor laws and
worker’s rights as well as a transnational division of labor. The system
of control under neoliberalism combines a militarized police regime with
repressive tolerance, the logic of securitization with granting freedom
of expression and ‘quality of life.’ The political figures, molded and
governed by the neoliberal regime itself are: *homo oeconomicus* (or
entrepreneur, responsible for his own well-being and manager of his own
human capital) and the subject of rights (the State is in charge of
guaranteeing that his human rights are respected). Aside from an
economic-political system, I see neoliberalism as a way of relating to
the world, to nature, to things and beings, which presupposes unlimited
growth and development. It is also a way of living and working: human
beings are being put to work beyond their capacities, erasing the
distinction between the leisure and work time. Neoliberalism is also a
sensibility that establishes the terms of empathy and sympathy and has
outlined a new notion of alterity. Configured as ‘social responsibility’
or social work, to ‘help’ the Other means to focus on the (so-called)
‘secondary malfunctions’ of the current capitalist system by
disseminating personal and managerial practices such as tolerance,
showing respect, nurturing dialogue, transparency and social
collaboration. In this sense, the “Other” is a ‘community to come,’ the
‘subject of rights’ (and to ethical restitution: refugees, displaced,
immigrants, those who live under a ‘state of exception’), the
*underclass*, that is, he or she who will be permanently outside
globalizing process, including access to education, jobs and
consumption. The category of the “Other” encompasses as well, political
and religious fundamentalists, fanatics who are outside globalizing and
modernizing processes by choice. These *Others* are sometimes given
faces in the media or in art by spectacularizing their subjectivity but
obviating the processes that placed them in those very situations that
render their lives precarious and endangered in the first place.

What has this got to do with the autonomy of art? As we will see, with
postmodernism, art and culture came to be at the center of social,
political and economic processes and are now inextricable from work,
production, consumption and subjectivity: in the neoliberal regime, art
in particular and culture in general are being used actively as
compensation and improvement of tools, normalizing and spreading the
antithesis of autonomous art, that is, ‘useful art.’ Subsumed to
political action, much of contemporary art has taken up a political role
as either ‘sensible politics’ or ‘socially engaged artwork.’ This is
tied to the fact that in our current world order, as Vishmidt and
Stakemeier point out, “Art no longer designates a reproductive and
representational realm, but one of productivity and social power” and
thus the autonomy of art itself has become a problem – in so far as it
has become a realm for the production of added value.[^2]

In the September 2013 editorial of *e-flux journal*, the editors stated
that art is produced at a double bind: while art can be complicit or
instrumentalized by power, its autonomy is located in an imaginary
space. What do they mean by this? First, that art, in order to be
*seen*, depends on a platform – an institution – and thus needs to be
part of some art world. Second, that the autonomy of art – as a separate
regime or an isolated sphere – is a fantasy. In order to consider the
autonomy of art outside of this double bind, Clement Greenberg tied the
autonomy of art – as art’s for art’s sake – to the avant-garde situating
criticality within the discipline or medium of art itself. Clearly
taking a position against socialist realist painting and those debates
of the 1930s relying on the relationship between art and politics
(embodied for example, by socialist realism or Mexican muralist
painting, which was very popular in New York in the 1930s) in
Greenberg’s definition, avant-garde (Modernist) painting was
characterized by self-critique in the sense that its formal expression
is a meditation on the qualities of the medium of painting. This meant
extricating figuration from the arts, and an essentialist understanding
of the mediums of art: for Greenberg, ‘purity’ was political –
especially if it was seen as an embodiment of a free nation versus the
authoritarian Soviet Union.

Postmodernism could be understood as an effort to break with Greenberg’s
disciplinary totalitarianism. Taking up the Dadaist and surrealist
avant-garde’s goals of unifying art and life, postmodernism thrived with
the advent of interdisciplinary strategies and in the symbiosis of art
with everything else. Post-war art continued the vanguardist critique of
the bourgeois notions of autonomous art and expressive artists,
embracing everyday objects, transforming the artist’s function,
questioning the institution of art or attacking it in the anarchist
manner.[^3] Following Hal Foster, art from the 1950s and 1960s
represents the failure to destroy the institution of art and the
institutionalization of the avant-garde.[^4] If Greenberg advocated
aesthetic autonomy with the purpose of resisting illustrational meanings
prone to kitsch and commercial forces, post-modernist’s inter
disciplinary strategies led art, in Foster’s words, “to become embedded
into life under the terms of mass capitalism, while it became
appropriated by the culture industry.”[^5] Due to its ‘post-medium’
condition, as Rosalind Krauss termed ‘postmodern interdisciplinarity,’
art is enmeshed with reality, and its materials can range from social
interaction, scientific research, montage, etc. With postmodernism, the
politics of the autonomy of art meant breaking away from in Greenberg’s
sense of purity and thus art’s autonomy came to be conceived as
“provisional, always defined diacritically (as something supplemental to
art) and situated politically, always *semi*.”[^6]

Beyond postmodernism, parallel to the increase of corporate subsidy to
the arts, there has been a recent boom in private collecting and thus a
market boom; the value of art is speculative and reflects the logic of
finance-based economy (and risk), and the economy and critical art share
the core value of ‘innovation.’ In this regard, neoliberalism has meant
for the arts privatization or the collusion between the private and the
public sector in order to subsidize them. In the past decade or so (and
in the US long before that), corporations have played an important role
in investing in culture, as institutions and corporations seek to play
an important role in communicating the private sector point of view on
an array of critical public topics.[^7] If art was previously supported
by the state, because culture was considered to be an asset to the
nation, today, corporations have appropriated this function, as they
sponsor and jury art shows, grant awards and funds and collect artworks.
Meanwhile, they promote their perspective on critical public topics.[^8]
In a 1998 article, art historian Chin-tao Wu highlighted how
corporations appropriated the concept of innovation – also known as
innovative disruption or creative destruction – in order to redefine its
meaning in corporate terms. She quotes Philip Morris Inc.’s – the U.S.
cigarette company – executive vice-president, John Murphy, on their
sponsorship of the 1969 exhibition, *When Attitudes Become Form*:

…We feel it is appropriate that we participate in bringing these works
to the attention of the public, for there is a key element in this ‘new
art’ which has its counterpart in the business world. That element is
*innovation* – without which it would be impossible for progress to be
made in any segment in society.[^9]

Furthermore, in the context of neoliberal reforms and sensibility, there
is a global tendency to subdue contemporary art to the politics of
culture administration, which implies “democratizing culture” making it
accessible to the masses, using it as a tool for the well-being of
society, for the reconstruction or healing of a community or society
that has experienced violence. Cultural institutions subsidized by
corporations and individual patrons apparently follow progressive
agendas promoting political – or socially minded art. For instance,
*Creative Time* in New York (funded by a mix of state and corporate
support) supports public and community art, with the goal of enabling
the politicization of social space with cultural intervention. This
organization sponsored Tania Bruguera’s “Immigrant Movement
International,” a project developed in Queens (2011), New York, which
the artist describes as: a flexible community space and long-term
socio-political movement, public workshops, events, actions and
partnerships with immigrant and service organizations; the artist
further qualified her project as “useful art.”[^10] The problem is that
initiatives such as this one, render opaque the real economic conditions
that led to situations of immigrant precarity to begin with: immigrants
are local signs of complex global forces operating on their conditions
of life and work at home and abroad. Many would argue that subsidy to
projects like Bruguera’s signals the transfer of social work to artistic
work funded by the private sector. In regards to this, politics comes
into the scene through art as social work in the name of ‘public
interest,’ only to become subject to administration, engineering and a
technocratic way of administering social problems, configuring the
private version of the welfare state.[^11] Furthermore, as the corporate
support to the establishment of antagonistic spaces becomes gradually
institutionalized within society, the question rises, after Gregory
Sholette , “Who owns cultural capital and who has the right to use it?”
.

As for him, corporate involvement in the arts is akin – or perhaps
integral to – to the current erosion of public space.[^12] Moreover, as
cultural spaces become institutional bastions of democratic
self-expression and sites for social reconciliation and self-help,
dissent is criminalized and forcefully punished worldwide.

It becomes evident that in the neoliberal globalized world, art and
culture are central to neoliberal processes as agents of globalization,
as tools for improvement and development, counterinsurgency and
pacification. An extreme example could be the ‘culturally sensible’
occupation of Iraq as described by Nato Thompson (director of *Creative
Time*). In uncritical terms, Thompson recounts how General David
Petraeus wrote a field manual geared at changing people’s attitudes
towards American occupation in Mosul; as exemplified in:

A story about counterinsurgency and community organizing, about getting
to know people as an occupying force, and getting to know people as
neighbors. It is a story about the military entering the terrain of that
thing called culture.[^13]

In this regard, a ‘cultural approach’ to military occupation is akin to
artistic social and community practices, as both involve “getting to
know people to be able to change the landscapes of life and of
power.”[^14] In the case of civilians in Mosul, this is done obviating
their experiences under attack. This cultural turn in the U.S. military
machinery took place a few years after theorist Frederic Jameson
diagnosed a “cultural turn” in capitalism, arguing that social space had
been completely saturated with the image of culture. This is because in
professional and daily activities, as well as in the various forms of
entertainment we enjoy, society consumes cultural products all the time.
The postmodern “cultural turn” diagnosed by Jameson, was further
elaborated by George Yúdice upon observing (in 2003) that the uses of
culture had undergone an unprecedented expansion not just in the
marketplace but also along social, political, and economic lines.
According to Yúdice, since the state and corporations already utilize
culture as a tool as they search for economic and sociopolitical
betterment, culture has become a resource and a compensatory device to
the ravages neoliberal policies have caused on the social tissue: both
give meaning and symbolic representations, provide mechanisms of solace,
as well as tools for re-invention and amelioration.[^15] In this
context, the line between public programs and relational aesthetics or
participative art appears to be increasingly blurred. Former Mexican
president Felipe Calderón made a public appearance in February 2012 in
Ciudad Juárez before a sign that stated: “No More Weapons.” The
billboard measured 8 x 21 m, and was built by soldiers of the National
Defense Department with 3 tons of assault weapons confiscated at the
border and molten into bricks. During the ceremony in which the
billboard was unveiled, Calderón turned toward the Mexican-American
border and begged the U.S. (in bad English): “No more weapons! Dear
friends of the United States, Mexico needs your help to stop this
terrible violence we are suffering.” During this trip, Calderón also
participated in the destruction of 6 thousand confiscated weapons, and
planted a tree at a Community Center. Calderon’s propagandistic gestures
immediately recall the language of socially engaged contemporary art,
particularly, Pedro Reyes’ intervention, *Palas por pistolas* in
Culiacán in 2008 (also executed in Juárez in the same week of Calderon’s
visit). Reyes’ project of exchanging shovels for weapons was subsidized
by two predominant Mexican corporations: Trupper (which producers
hardware) and Coppel (which sells appliances and other goods). For this
project, Reyes devised a Television campaign inviting citizens to give
up their weapons in exchange for a coupon exchangeable for appliances.
The artist collected 1527 weapons, which were destroyed at a military
zone in a public act. Giving his action a further twist, Reyes sought to
have the rests of the weapons welded together to produce 1527 shovels
carrying an inscription telling the story of the weapon they represented
(this was not possible due to technical reasons, so Trupper ended up
donating them). The engraved shovels were distributed in art
institutions and public schools and adults and children planted 1527
trees. To Reyes, this ritual had a pedagogical purpose: “to show the
people how an agent of death can become an agent of life.”[^16] A
similar public purge of weapons in exchange for appliances (and
tablets), is currently happening in Mexico City led by a “Pink Ladies
Brigade.” These relational actions – both by General Petraeus’ and by
the Mexican government, show how the language of contemporary art has
been appropriated by propaganda for its purposes, making politics and
aesthetics indistinguishable, as both operate in the realm of symbolic
and perceptive work. These are also examples of the predominant idea
that violence can be eased – or appeased – through cultural intervention
and in the Mexican case, by giving away highly desirable goods.

Aside from this ‘artistic approach’ to social, political and military
action, sensible production has taken up a political function, as
political work has been developed into a matter of codification using
medial forms with the purpose of creating a terrain for political acts,
creating an “activist imaginary” made of political fields constituted by
images. Political action embedded in cultural forms implies making
things public as a way of signs.[^17] An example could be Trevor
Paglen’s (sometimes abstract or blurry) photographs of top-secret
governmental, nuclear and military sites. Works such as Paglen’s, seek
to make visible the invisible under the premise that such an act is
political. Yet, what images such as Paglen’s represent is vague in
political terms. What I find problematic is that the gap between
*political* representation and *aesthetic* representation is now wider
than ever. Representation means “making the absent present,” which is
always an incomplete task because totality is impossible to convey, and
it works in two senses. As *Vertreten* (or political representation) it
means taking the place of others in order to speak on their behalf, and
as *Darstellen* (or aesthetic representation) it is the form of
representation that implies describing the other in the first person.
Representation was brought into a crisis in the 1960s because it was
accused of hiding the fact that the speaker was occupying the place of
the represented and thus, workers and minorities were prompted to speak
on their behalf and in the first person. Nowadays, however, the gap
between political (*Vertreten*) and aesthetic (*Darstellen*)
representations is wider than ever because whatever political acts
encoded in medial forms may represent, it renders it unstable – partly
because politics have become unrepresentable due to lack of stable
political subjects – as they are collective enunciations constantly
‘becoming.’ In this context, “expressive” politics is valued over
representation because “it embodies rebellious subjectivities expressing
themselves without delegation and they do so through formal and symbolic
richness.”[^18] One of the issues that rises is that there is lack of a
common ground to universalize the multiplicity of singular struggles and
social movements scattered across the world like archipelagos. There are
just too many images in the Infosphere, and ‘sensible politics’ exists
for and by its own public, which is made up of social movements and
politically minded cultural producers. In this regard, cultural
infrastructure functions as the platform for ‘sensible politics,’ in
which curators, museum directors and board members (sometimes
representing corporate interests) select and contextualize artwork that
presents certain events and social actions thus determining the
boundaries of public thinking.

Aside from its compensatory role, culture (insofar at it is ‘creativity’
and cognitive production), is not only at the center of political
action, but is also embedded in production and consumption processes,
and neoliberalism – in so far as it has thrived in post-fordist
(flexible) forms and conditions of labor – which had taken up the
characteristics of aesthetic production. Signs and nascent meanings,
desires and projections meet in the market because the post-fordist
economy is based on manufacturing experiences, signs and information.
The core of the knowledge economy is creativity and this is why
qualities of aesthetic production have become hegemonic and have
transformed labor and consumption processes as well as aesthetic
experiences. Not only sensations and feelings are being trivialized and
packaged for sale. Disinterestedness (the core of aesthetic experience
as defined by Kant) has also vanished.[^19] This arises as the result of
aesthetic experience being enslaved for profit, as well as subsumed to
“political” efficiency – in the sense of State and corporate strategic
investment in culture, as well as it was the transformation of political
action into sensible forms – as opposed to action. These tendencies are
a result of what Stephen Shaviro describes as “the ruthless cognition of
aesthetic sensations and feelings”, as they were transformed into data,
exploited forms of labor, which were marketed as fresh experiences,
exciting lifestyle choices, or as socially-responsible cultural
activities. In the political arena, thirty years of neoliberalism have
crushed any confidence that we might have had on the social contract. If
artists used to identify with the proletariat and social struggles
before, nowadays, aesthetic production – which is lacking a reflexive
program in regards to the conditions of its own production – is geared
just toward the supplementing of the entertainment market with
cultivated and knowledgeable new experiences and sensations.
Furthermore, through subsidizing art and cultural projects,
corporations, states and arts patrons put into practice following
principle of the Prince Claus Fund: “There can be no development without
culture, and there can be no cultural development without freedom of
debate.”[^20] As this quote becomes evermore evident, the public expects
from culture and art rigorous accountability, critical questioning,
democratic access, dialogue and openness as well as equal representation
in the visual regime (and this is posited as the road to development).
In this context, culture is perceived as “a basic need,” as the founding
principle of Prince Claus Fund states. Thus, states, corporations, the
private sector and society attribute to art a decisive political role on
the one hand, as they invest in culture with the purpose of generating
political and economic surplus value. Bearing in mind that the autonomy
of art is always a political matter, could art be politicized beyond its
autonomy as a site for added value?

The condition of possibility of autonomous, committed art under the new
neoliberal world order, is radically different from what we see as the
autonomy of art under modernism (as *l’art pour l’art*) and post-modern
interdisciplinarity. These imply the institutionalization of the
avant-garde and the subsumption of art to the market, bearing in mind
that the emancipatory promises of modernism (criticality, self-design,
creativity) are now located at the center of our everyday lives both via
consumption and production processes. Theodor Adorno’s take on the
autonomy of art in his (1962) essay entitled “Commitment,” can be
helpful here. In this essay, Adorno responds to Jean-Paul Sartre’s
aesthetic manifesto *What is Literature?* and elaborates a theoretical
debate about engaged literature and autonomous art. According to Adorno,
there are two kinds of works of art. On the one hand, there are works
that “are vulgarly assimilated to the existence against which they
protest.”[^21] These works “are content with being mere fetishes or a
pass-time, and thus degenerate and become de-politicized cultural
merchandise.”[^22] This de-politicization, for Adorno is in fact, deeply
political – much politically or socially minded contemporary art would
fit into this category. On the other hand, there is *engaged autonomous
ar*t, which, as art, is necessarily detached from reality. Adorno
defines the autonomy of art not in the sense of its strictly formalist
aspect (although like Walter Benjamin, Adorno also vouches for works of
art that are both formally and politically progressive). For Adorno,
autonomous art negates a direct connection to reality. The distance that
autonomous art has from reality, however, is mediated by reality itself:
this means that a work of art cannot come out of the blue – its origin
is a reaction against reality. Adorno, as does Benjamin, draws a
distinction between ‘commitment’ and ‘tendency.’ Committed art does not
bear the intention of generating betterment measures, legislative acts
or practical institutions (like propaganda) or even transmitting a
concrete ideology, but it operates at the level of fundamental
attitudes. For Adorno, autonomous and engaged works of art operate at
the level of abandoning the social contract with reality and “cease to
speak as if they were reporting the facts: this is the moment in which a
work of art makes people’s hair stand up.”[^23] According to Adorno, the
shock of the unintelligible (or the ambiguous), is able to communicate
more than what is legible and explicit. In that sense, works of art are
autonomous, instead of heteronomous. Heteronomy implies that an artwork
is subject to a different power, a law that is external and foreign to
art and to its formal logic. When it is autonomous, engaged art is
neither subject to empirical reality nor to a correct political
tendency. Art’s autonomy protects it from popularization, from its
adoption by the market and it implies liberating it from any other
external purpose: from being useful. In this manner, an autonomous work
of art does not convey a message nor does it need to convince the public
(or preach to the converted). And although it opposes society,
autonomous art is still part of it.

If the autonomy of modern art implied considering art as a realm
distanced from reality, art’s post-medium condition means that it has
become a niche within reality.[^24] What is thus at stake in autonomous
art nowadays, would be to posit it as an experience of reality that is
fundamentally foreign and antagonistic to the prevailing reality. If the
autonomy of art should be located in the realm of reproduction as Marina
Vischmidt argues[^25] – it would oppose the realm of production of the
social, political and economic surplus value, as it would go against
embodying power and the entrepreneurial model of work. Producing
difference, dragging out the laboring conditions hidden within it,
autonomous art would imply mimesis with distancing itself. Beyond being
used as a tool, autonomous art would refuse becoming an instrument
against its own illusions, as well as refusing to become a political
force, or to be subjected to interests foreign to itself or simply
becoming a pleasing commodity. Overcoming self-censorship, it would
cease to participate in the economy of the globalized artworld,
especially in the name of critical practices, political work or social
justice, abandoning its claim to become a progressive social force.[^26]
Above all, it would work against the power of culture and the culture of
power.

### Reference List

Adorno, Theodor. 'Commitment', *New Left Review* I (87088)
(September-December, 1974).
http://newleftreview.org/I/87-88/theodor-adorno-commitment

Emmelhainz, Irmgard. 'Art and the Cultural Turn: Farewell to Committed
Autonomous Art?', *e-flux journal* 42 (February, 2013).
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/art-and-the-cultural-turn-farewell-to-committed-autonomous-art/

Espósito, Marcelo. 'Lecciones de historia. El arte, entre la
experimentación institucional y las políticas del movimiento', 2009.
SITAC lecture, http://marceloexposito.net/pdf/exposito\_sitac.pdf

Foster, Hal. 'What’s Neo about the Neo-Avant-Garde?', *October*, Vol. 70
(Autumn, 1994): 5-32.

Fraser, Andrea. 'Le 1% c’est moi', 2011.
http://whitney.org/file\_columns/0002/9848/andreafraser\_1\_2012whitneybiennial.pdf

Marchart, Oliver. 'Art, Space and the Public Sphere(s)', 2002,
http://eipcp.net/transversal/0102/marchart/en

McLagan, Megan and McKee, Yates (eds) *Sensible Politics:* *The Visual
Culture of Nongovernmental Activism*. Cambridge, Mass., Zone Books,
2012.

Shaviro, Stephen. 'Accelerationist Aesthetics', *e-flux journal* \#46
(Summer, 2013). Dostupno na internet stranici:
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/accelerationist-aesthetics-necessary-inefficiency-in-times-of-real-subsumption/

Sholette, Gregory. 'Welcome to the Desert of the Real Artworld', *Oxford
Art Journal* 27 (2) (2004) pp. 260-261.
http://www.gregorysholette.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/07\_welcome1.pdf

Stakemeier, Kerstin and Vishmidt, Marina. 'The Value of Autonomy: A
Conversation Between Kerstin Stakemeier and Marina Vishmidt About the
Reproduction of Art', *Texte zur Kunst* 88 (December, 2012): 102–117.

Thompson, Nato. 2013, 'The Insurgents Part I: Community-Based Practice
as Military Methodology,' *e-flux journal* \# 47 (September, 2013),
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-insurgents-part-i-community-based-practice-as-military-methodology/

Vishmidt, Marina. 'Mimesis of the Hardened and Alienated: Social
Practice as a Business Model', *e-flux journal* \# 46 (March, 2013),
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/“mimesis-of-the-hardened-and-alienated”-social-practice-as-business-model/

Wu, Chin-tao. 'Embracing the Enterprise Culture: Art Institutions Since
the 1980s', *New Left Review* I 230 (July-August, 1998)

[^1]: Different versions of this essay were presented at Bureau Publik,
    Copenhaguen, October 31^st^, 2013 and KHIB in Bergen, Norway, on
    November 5, 2013.

[^2]: Kerstin Stakemeier and Marina Vishmidt, 'The Value of Autonomy: A
    conversation between Kerstin Stakemeier and Marina Vishmidt about
    the reproduction of art,' *Texte zur Kunst* 88 (December 2012):
    102–117.

[^3]: Hal Foster, 'What’s Neo about the Neo-Avant-Garde?' *October*,
    Vol. 70, The Duchamp Effect (Autumn 1994): 5-32.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Gregory Sholette, 'Welcome to the Desert of the Real Artworld,'
    *Oxford Art Journal* 27.2, (2004), p. 259.
    http://www.gregorysholette.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/07\_welcome1.pdf

[^8]: Ibid., pp. 260-261.

[^9]: Chin-tao Wu, 'Embracing the Enterprise Culture: Art Institutions
    Sicne the 1980s', *New Left Review* I/ 230, (July-August 1998): 31.

[^10]: See artist’s statement available at:
    http://www.taniabruguera.com/cms/486-0-Immigrant+Movement+International.htm.

[^11]: Oliver Marchart, 'Art, Space and the Public Sphere(s)' (2002),
    [http://eipcp.net/transversal/0102/marchart/en](styles.xml)

[^12]: Gregory Sholette, 'Welcome to the Desert of the Real Artworld,'
    *Oxford Art Journal* 27.2 (2004): 260-261, :
    http://www.gregorysholette.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/07\_welcome1.pdf

[^13]: Nato Thompson, 'The Insurgents Part I: Community-Based Practice
    as Military Methodology,' *e-flux journal* \# 47, (September 2013),
    available
    online:[http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-insurgents-part-i-community-based-practice-as-military-methodology/](stylesWithEffects.xml).
    In the second part of his essay, Thompson includes a disclaimer
    about him glossing over U.S. military violence in Iraq. See:
    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-insurgents-part-ii-fighting-the-left-by-being-the-left/

[^14]: Thompson, 2013.

[^15]: See Irmgard Emmelhainz, 'Art and the Cultural Turn: Farewell to
    Committed Autonomous Art?' *e-flux journal* N. 42 (February 2013),
    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/art-and-the-cultural-turn-farewell-to-committed-autonomous-art/

[^16]: Artist’s statement available online:
    http://pedroreyes.net/palasporpistolas.php.

[^17]: See: Megan McLagan and Yates McKee (eds), 'Introduction,'
    *Sensible Politics: The Visual Culture of Nongovernmental Activism*,
    (Cambridge, Mass., Zone Books, 2012), pp. 9-22.

[^18]: Marcelo Espósito, 'Lecciones de historia. El arte, entre la
    experimentación institucional y las políticas del movimiento', SITAC
    2009. http://marceloexposito.net/pdf/exposito\_sitac.pdf

[^19]: Stephen Shaviro, 'Accelerationist Aesthetics,' *e-flux journal*
    \#46 (Summer 2013).

[^20]: From their website: “… The Prince Claus Fund’s mission is to
    actively seek cultural collaborations founded on equality and trust,
    with partners of excellence, in spaces where resources and
    opportunities for cultural expression, creative production and
    research are limited and cultural heritage is threatened. The Prince
    Claus Fund is based in Amsterdam and is supported by the Dutch
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Dutch Postcode Lottery.” For
    more information, visit their website:
    http://www.princeclausfund.org/en/the-fund.

[^21]: Theodor Adorno, 'Comittment,' *New Left Review* I/87088
    (September-December 1974),
    http://newleftreview.org/I/87-88/theodor-adorno-commitment

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Ibid.

[^24]: Marina Vishmidt, 'Mimesis of the Hardened and Alienated: Social
    Practice as a Business Model,' *e-flux journal* 43 (March, 2013),
    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/“mimesis-of-the-hardened-and-alienated”-social-practice-as-business-model/

[^25]: Ibid.

[^26]: Andrea Fraser, 'Le 1% c’est moi' (2011), Le gorille penseur est
    un guerrier : le guerrier est un être pour la mort, puisque son
    métier consiste à mourir. Ici, il pense un peu à la fin de son
    espèce, ou à la fin de l'ère des guerriers -notre époque n'est plus
    celle des guerriers, elle est celle des insectes, des animaux
    insignifiants, plus capables de
    s'adapter...http://whitney.org/file\_columns/0002/9848/andreafraser\_1\_2012whitneybiennial.pdf

